Dagstuhl Seminar on

Adaptive, Output Sensitive, Online

and Parameterized Algorithms

Executive Summary

Dates: 9.04.09 - 24.04.09, Seminar 09171

Organizers: J´er´emy Barbay (DCC - Universidad de Chile, CL)

Rolf Klein (Universit¨at Bonn, DE)
Alejandro Lopez-Ortiz (University of Waterloo,
CA)
Rolf Niedermeier (Universit¨at Jena, DE)

Topics: Databases, data structures, algorithms, complexity,
 computer graphics, optimization, scheduling.
Keywords: Adaptive analysis, instance optimal algorithms,
ﬁxed parameter tractable, output sensitive algorithms.


Traditionally the analysis of algorithms measures the complexity of a problem or algorithm
in terms of the worst-case behavior over all inputs of a given size. However, in certain cases an
improved algorithm can be obtained by considering a ﬁner partition of the input space. As this
idea has been independently rediscovered in many areas, the workshop gathered participants from
diﬀerent ﬁelds in order to explore the impact and the limits of this technique, in the hope to spring
new collaboration and to seed the uniﬁcation of the technique.

The workshop was organized into a serie of tutorials and “bridging” talks in the ﬁrst two days,
followed by a three days of more regular taks grouped by pairs of themes, with a large amount of
time left for interaction in the afternoon, and two “exchange sessions” on Tuesday and Wednesday
evenings.

The workshop succeeded in attracting many young students, and a proportion of female participants 
larger than usual in computer science. The survey attests in particular that the workshop
suggested new directions of research (22 participants rated the sentence “The seminar identiﬁed
new research directions.” on average of 4.05 out of 5), but that participants would prefer to receive
the schedule of the workshop earlier.

During the exchange sessions, many participants mentionned that they enjoyed from hearing
about proof techniques and open problems in areas they were not familiar with before. After the
session, several participants, both young and more experienced, contacted the organizers separately
to express their satisfaction with the social aspect of the seminar.

1

Dagstuhl Seminar Proceedings 09171 Adaptive, Output Sensitive, Online and Parameterized Algorithms http://drops.dagstuhl.de/opus/volltexte/2009/2120