09171 Abstracts Collection

Adaptive, Output Sensitive, Online and

Parameterized Algorithms

 Dagstuhl Seminar 

Jeremy Barbay1, Rolf Klein2, Alejandro Lopez-Ortiz3 and Rolf Niedermeier4

1 University of Santiago CL

jeremy@dcc.uchile.cl
2 Universität Bonn, D

rolf.klein@uni-bonn.de

3 University of Waterloo, CA

4 Universität Jena, D

rolf.niedermeier@uni-jena.de

Abstract. From 19.01. to 24.04.2009, the Dagstuhl Seminar 09171 Adaptive,
 Output Sensitive, Online and Parameterized Algorithms  was held
in Schloss Dagstuhl  Leibniz Center for Informatics. During the seminar,
 several participants presented their current research, and ongoing
work and open problems were discussed. Abstracts of the presentations
given during the seminar as well as abstracts of seminar results and ideas
are put together in this paper. The rst section describes the seminar
topics and goals in general. Links to extended abstracts or full papers
are provided, if available.

Keywords. Adaptive analysis, instance optimal algoritms, xed parameter 
tractable, output sensitive algorithms

09171 Executive Summary  Adaptive, Output Sensitive,
Online and Parameterized Algorithms

Traditionally the analysis of algorithms measures the complexity of a problem
or algorithm in terms of the worst-case behavior over all inputs of a given size.
However, in certain cases an improved algorithm can be obtained by considering
a ner partition of the input space. As this idea has been independently rediscovered 
in many areas, the workshop gathered participants from dierent elds
in order to explore the impact and the limits of this technique, in the hope to
spring new collaboration and to seed the unication of the technique.

Keywords:
tractable, output sensitive algorithms

Adaptive analysis, instance optimal algorithms, xed parameter

Dagstuhl Seminar Proceedings 09171
Adaptive, Output Sensitive, Online and Parameterized Algorithms
http://drops.dagstuhl.de/opus/volltexte/2009/2122

2

Jeremy Barbay, Rolf Klein, Alejandro Lopez-Ortiz and Rolf Niedermeier

Joint work of: Barbay, Jérémy; Klein, Rolf; López-Ortiz, Alejandro; Niedermeier,
 Rolf

Extended Abstract: http://drops.dagstuhl.de/opus/volltexte/2009/2120

Parameterized/Adaptive Analysis of Online Steiner Tree
Problems

Spyros Angelopoulos (MPI für Informatik - Saarbrücken, DE)

Steiner tree problems occupy a central place in both areas of approximation and
on-line algorithms. Many variants have been studied from the point of view of
competitive analysis, and for several of these variants tight bounds are known.
However, in several cases, worst-case analysis is overly pessimistic, which fails to
explain the relative performance of algorithms. We show how adaptive analysis
can help resolve this problem. As case studies, we consider the Steiner tree
problem in directed graphs, and the Priority Steiner tree problem.

Keywords: Online algorithms, Steiner tree problems, adaptive and parameteried 
analysis

Full Paper: http://drops.dagstuhl.de/opus/volltexte/2009/2121

The relation between Adaptive Algorithms and
Compressed Succinct Data Structures

Jeremy Barbay (DCC - Universidad de Chile, CL)

Restricted classes of permutations can be sorted in time o(n lg n), faster than
O(n lg n), through adaptive sorting algorithms. We show that each of those
results imply a compression scheme for permutation, and that some of those
result even in a compressed succinct data structure, which can be manipulated
without uncompressing the whole permutation.

Those results are important in the case of self indices of text, which are
strongly based on permutations, but application of the relation between fast
algorithms and small data structure is not limited to permutations: it yields also
compression of binary relations, integers, etcetera.

Keywords: Adaptive algorithms succinct data structure

Adaptive, Output Sensitive, Online and Parameterized Algorithms

3

Alternative Measures for Computaqtional Complexity
with applications to Machine Learning

Shai Ben-David (University of Waterloo, CA)

We address the issue of problems that are hard from a worst-case computational
complexity view, but turn to be eciently solvable in practice.

Having in mind a variety of algorithmic problems in machine learning in that
category, we propose an alternative measure of computational complexity that
takes into account not jst the input size but also its "robustness" for the given
task. The new measure coincides with the common worst-case complexity for
"nicely behaving" data, but becomes less demanding for very no-robust 9or, if
you wish, non-informative, or irrelevant) data.

We argue that most naturally arising inputs are "nicely behaving" thus providing 
a possible explanation to the theory-practice complexity gap in the machine 
learning domain.

Using Property Testing for Ecient Sort of Relations

Sagi Ben-Moshe (Technion - Haifa, IL)

Sometimes, relational operations need to be performed on nearly-sorted relations,
 in which most tuples appear close to their place in the order (but not
always exactly in place), while a small number of tuples may be completely out
of their place in the order.

Such relations can result from updates performed on relations that were

originally sorted, or as interim results when evaluating a complex query.

Currently, in such cases nearly-sorted relations are treated the same as unsorted 
relations, and when relational operations are evaluated for them, a generic
algorithm is used. However, many operations can be computed more eciently
by an algorithm that exploits this near-ordering, yet to benet from using such
an algorithm, we also need to refrain from using the wrong algorithm for a relation 
which is not nearly-sorted. For this, an ecient test is required, i.e., a
very fast approximation algorithm for establishing whether a given relation is
suciently nearly-sorted.

In this paper, we provide the theoretical foundations for the problem of query
evaluation over nearly-sorted relations. We formally dene what it means for a
relation to be nearly-sorted and show how operations over such relations can
be executed eciently. We provide ecient probabilistic tests for some cases of
nearly-sorted relations (including the most general one) and illustrate how to
incorporate them into a database management system. Proving the eciency of
these tests constitutes a substantial part of this work.

Finally, we provide experimental results, which show that our approach outperforms 
standard evaluation methods.

4

Jeremy Barbay, Rolf Klein, Alejandro Lopez-Ortiz and Rolf Niedermeier

Parameterized Complexity of Kemeny Ranking

Nadja Betzler (Universität Jena, DE)

The computation of Kemeny rankings is central to many applications in the
context of rank aggregation. Unfortunately, the problem is NP-hard. We consider 
various natural parameterizations resulting in ecient parameterized algorithms 
for relevant scenarios. In particular, we present a search tree for the
parameter "Kemeny score" and give dynamic programming algorithms for the
parameters "number of candidates", "maximum candidate range", and "average
KT-distance between pairs of votes."

Joint work with Michael R. Fellows, Jiong Guo, Rolf Niedermeier, Frances

A. Rosamond

Based on "Fixed-parameter algorithms for Kemeny rankings" (AAIM 2009)
and "How similarity helps to eciently compute Kemeny rankings" (AAMAS
2009)

Keywords: Voting systems, consensus, xed-parameter tractability

Five analysis techniques for on-line algorithms

Joan Boyar (Univ. of Southern Denmark - Odense, DK)

Five techniques for analyzing the performance of on-line algorithms are compared
on algorithms for classical and dual bin packing. The ve techniques are competitive 
analysis, the accommodating function, resource augmentation, relative
worst order analysis, and bijective analysis. For classical bin packing First-Fit
is compared to Worst-Fit and Worst-Fit is compared to Next-Fit. For Dual bin
packing, First-Fit is compared to Worst-Fit. Even with these simple algorithms,
there are some open problems.

Alternative Measures for Analysis of Online Algorithms

Reza Dorrigiv (University of Waterloo, CA)

In this talk I show that there is a large gap between the theory and practice of
paging as well as other important on-line algorithms. In particular, the competitive 
ratio which is the main technique for analysis of on-line algorithms is known
to produce in unrealistic measures of performance for certain problems. In this
talk I concentrate on the paging problem, providing the rst theoretical proof
of optimality of LRU using a new measure derived from rst principles which
better corresponds to observed practice. This can be extended to other settings.
I also provide other alternative measures for analysis of online algorithms and
show that they lead to promising results.

Adaptive, Output Sensitive, Online and Parameterized Algorithms

5

Better Bounds on Online Unit Clustering

Martin R. Ehmsen (Univ. of Southern Denmark - Odense, DK)

Unit Clustering is the problem of dividing a set of points from a metric space into
a minimal number of subsets such that the points in each subset are enclosable by
a unit ball. We continue the work, recently initiated by Chan and Zarrabi-Zadeh,
on determining the competitive ratio of the online version of this problem. For
the one-dimensional case, we develop a deterministic algorithm, improving the
best known upper bound of 7/4 by Epstein and van Stee to 5/3. This narrows
the gap to the best known lower bound of 8/5 to only 1/15. Our algorithm
automatically leads to improvements in all higher dimensions as well. Finally,
we strengthen the deterministic lower bound in two dimensions and higher from
2 to 13/6.

Preemptive online scheduling with reordering

Leah Epstein (University of Haifa, IL)

We consider online preemptive scheduling of jobs, arriving one by one, on m
parallel machines. A buer of xed size K>0, which assists in partial reordering
of the input, is available, to be used for the storage of at most K unscheduled
jobs. We consider several variants of the problem. For general inputs and identical
machines, we show that a buer of size Θ(m) reduces the overall competitive
ratio from e/(e − 1) to 4/3. Surprisingly, the competitive ratio as a function of
m is not monotone, unlike the case where K = 0.

Joint work of: Dósa, György; Epstein, Leah

Comparing First-Fit and Next-Fit for Online Edge
Coloring

Lene Monrad Favrholdt (Univ. of Southern Denmark - Odense, DK)

We study the performance of the algorithms First-Fit and Next-Fit for two online
edge coloring problems. In the min-coloring problem, all edges must be colored
using as few edges as possible. In the max-coloring problem, a xed number of
colors is given, and as many edges as possible should be colored. Previous analysis
using the competitive ratio has not separated the performance of First-Fit and
Next-Fit, but intuition suggests that First-Fit should be better than Next-Fit.
We compare First-Fit and Next-Fit using the relative worst order ratio, and
show that First-Fit is better than Next-Fit for the min-coloring problem. For
the max-coloring problem, we show that First-Fit and Next-Fit are not strictly
comparable, i.e., there are graphs for which First-Fit is better than Next-Fit and
graphs where Next-Fit is slightly better than First-Fit.

6

Jeremy Barbay, Rolf Klein, Alejandro Lopez-Ortiz and Rolf Niedermeier

Keywords: Online edge coloring, competitive ratio, relative worst-order ratio,
First-Fit, Next-Fit

Experimental Study of FPT Algorithms for the

Rudolf Fleischer (Fudan University - Shanghai, CN)

Finding minimum feedback vertex sets in directed graphs (the DFVS problem)
is crucial in both theoretical and system research areas, for example, to nd
resource deadlocks. Unfortunately, the directed FVS problem is quite dierent
from its undirected counterpart (the UFVS problem) and it is not very well understood.
 Since FVS problems are NP-hard, their theoretical study has recently
focused on nding ecient xed parameter tractable (FPT) algorithms. While
UFVS has a quadratic kernel [5], DFVS was only recently shown to be in FPT
[1], and it still remains an open question whether it has a polynomial size kernel.
Inspired by the recent kernelization techniques for UFVS by Thomasse [5], we
propose 
ve data reduction rules for DVFS, Edge Canonicalization, Self-Loop,
Dummy Nodes, Chaining Nodes, and Flower, which can signicantly reduce the
size of the input graph and the parameter k. This leads to an algorithm for DFVS
that runs in time O(4 k k!nO(1) ), where n and k are the number of vertices
and the size of minimum feedback vertex set, respectively. In a comprehensive
experimental study we compared our new algorithm with the previous FPT
algorithm by Chen et al. [1].

We implemented a dense graph generator to test the running time, kernel size,
memory usage, and recursion depth of this algorithm on dense random graphs.
In particularly, by controlling the optimum solution size k, we evaluated how the
runtime 
relates to the parameter k. Furthermore, we implemented a resource
al location graph (RAG) generator simulating the deadlock characteristics of
processes in real complex systems [4]. We used Markov chains to control the
distribution of processes and resources, and tested whether our algorithm could
quickly resolve the deadlock cases. Finally, we implemented the approximation
algorithm by Even et al. [2] to further accelerate the search of small feedback
vertex sets in graphs generated by the RAG generator, and compared the results
to Chen's algorithm. All implementations were done using LEDA [3].

Keywords: FPT, DFVS, data reduction rules

Joint work of: Fleischer, Rudolf; Wu, Xi

Two Topics in Adaptive Algorithms: Hulls and Strings

Robert Fraser (University of Waterloo, CA)

In this talk we cover two problems that we have been studying with adaptive
analysis components.

Adaptive, Output Sensitive, Online and Parameterized Algorithms

7

First, we examine the planar convex hull problem, which has natural extensions 
from well known adaptive sorting algorithms. Next, we cover string
matching, where we are performing online string matching upon a pattern with
known distributions of characters.

Keywords: Adaptive analysis, convex hull, string matching, adaptive sorting

Hyperbolic Dovetailing

David G. Kirkpatrick (University of British Columbia - Vancouver, CA)

A familiar quandary, in many settings (computational and otherwise), arises
when there are several possible alternatives for the solution of a problem, but no
way of knowing which, if any, are viable for a particular problem instance. Faced
with this uncertainty, we are forced to simulate the parallel exploration of alternatives 
through some kind of co-ordinated interleaving (dovetailing) process.
The goal, as usual, is to nd a solution with low total cost. Much of the existing
work on such problems has assumed, implicitly or explicitly, that at most one
of the alternatives is viable. This assumption provides support for a competitive 
analysis of algorithms (using the cost of the unique viable alternative as a
benchmark).

However, just as it is unrealistic to analyse algorithms in terms of the worst
case cost of the alternative solutions or their worst-case ordering (giving rise to
competitive analysis), it is also unrealistic in many scenarios to make the worstcase 
assumption that at most one of the alternatives is viable. In this paper, we
relax this assumption in revisiting several familiar dovetailing problems.

Our main contribution is the introduction of a novel process interleaving
technique, called hyperbolic dovetailing that achieves a competitive ratio that
is within a logarithmic factor of optimal on all inputs in the worst, average
and expected cases, over all possible deterministic (and randomized) dovetailing
schemes. We also show that no other dovetailing strategy can guarantee an
asymptotically smaller competitive ratio for all inputs.

An interesting application of hyperbolic dovetailing arises in the design of
what we call input-thrifty algorithms, algorithms that are designed to minimize
the total precision of the input requested in order to evaluate some given predicate.
 We show that for some very basic predicates involving real numbers (such
as certifying that the numbers are not all identical) we can use hyperbolic dovetailing 
to provide input-thrifty algorithms that are competitive, in this novel
cost measure, with the best algorithms that solve these problems.

Parameterized complexity of geometric problems

Christian Knauer (FU Berlin, DE)

Parameterized complexity aims to design exact algorithms whose running times
depend on certain parameters of the input data that are naturally related to the
problem at hand and in a way capture its complexity.

8

Jeremy Barbay, Rolf Klein, Alejandro Lopez-Ortiz and Rolf Niedermeier

A problem is called xed-parameter tractable (FPT) with respect to a parameter 
k if there is an ecient algorithm to solve the problem for the cases
where the parameter k is small. Another objective of this theory is to show that
such algorithms are unlikely to exist for certain problems (and parameters).

Not many geometric problems have been studied from the parameterized
complexity point of view. Most research has focused on special (combinatorial)
parameters for geometric problems, like, e.g., the number of inner points (i.e.,
points in the interior of the convex hull) for the TSP problem or for the problem
of computing minimum convex decompositions. Also, on the negative side, only
few connections between geometric problems and known hard parameterized
problems are known to date.

We provide a brief tour of results from parameterized complexity theory
for various geometric problems with respect to various parameters (hyperplane
depth, clustering, polygon guarding).

Keywords: Parameterized complexity, Computational geometry

Derandomizing Non-uniform Color-Coding

Alexander Langer (RWTH Aachen, DE)

Color-coding, as introduced by Alon, Yuster, and Zwick, is a well-known tool
for algorithm design and can often be eciently derandomized using universal
hash functions. In the special case of only two colors, one can use (n, k)-universal
sets for the derandomization. Here, we introduce (n, k, l)-universal sets that are
typically smaller and can be constructed faster. Nevertheless, for some problems
they are still sucient for derandomization and faster deterministic algorithms
can be obtained. This particularly works well when the color-coding does not
use a uniform probability distribution. To exemplify the concept, we present an
algorithm for the Unique Coverage problem introduced by Demaine, Feige,
Hajiaghayi, and Salavatipour. The example also shows how to extend the concept
to multiple colors.

Joint work with Joachim Kneis and Peter Rossmanith.

A Comparison of Performance Measures for Online
Algorithms

Kim Skak Larsen (Univ. of Southern Denmark - Odense, DK)

A systematic study of several recently suggested measures for online algorithms
is provided in the context of a specic problem, namely, the two server problem
on three colinear points. Even though the problem is simple, it encapsulates a
core challenge in online algorithms which is to balance greediness and adaptability.
 We examine how these measures evaluate the Greedy Algorithm and

Adaptive, Output Sensitive, Online and Parameterized Algorithms

9

Lazy Double Coverage, commonly studied algorithms in the context of server
problems. We examine Competitive Analysis, the Max/Max Ratio, the Random
Order Ratio, Bijective Analysis and Relative Worst Order Analysis and determine 
how they compare the two algorithms. We nd that by the Max/Max
Ratio and Bijective Analysis, Greedy is the better algorithm. Under the other
measures Lazy Double Coverage is better, though Relative Worst Order Analysis 
indicates that Greedy is sometimes better. Our results also provide the rst
proof of optimality of an algorithm under Relative Worst Order Analysis.

Joint work of: Larsen, Kim Skak; Boyar, Joan; Iranim, Sandy

Meta-Theorems for Kernelization

Daniel Lokshtanov (University of Bergen, NO)

Polynomial time preprocessing to reduce instance size is one of the most commonly 
deployed heuris-tics to tackle computationally hard problems. In a parameterized 
problem, every instance I comes with a positive integer k. The problem
is said to admit a polynomial kernel if, in polynomial time, we can reduce the
size of the instance I to a polynomial in k, while preserving the answer. In this
paper, we show that all problems expressible in Counting Monadic Second Order 
Logic and satisfying a compactness property admit a polynomial kernel on
graphs of bounded genus. Our second result is that all problems that have nite
integer index and satisfy a weaker compactness condition admit a linear kernel
on graphs of bounded genus. The study of kernels on planar graphs was initiated 
by a seminal paper of Alber, Fellows, and Niedermeier [J. ACM, 2004 ] who
showed that PLANAR DOMINATING SET admits a linear kernel. Following
this result, a multitude of problems have been shown to admit linear kernels on
planar graphs by combining the ideas of Alber et al. with problem specic reduction 
rules. Our theorems unify and extend all previously known kernelization
results on planar graph problems. Combining our theorems with the Erdos-Posa
property we obtain various new results on linear kernels for a number of packing
and covering problems.

Keywords: Kernelization

Joint work of:
Penninkx; Saurabh, Saket; Thilikos, Dimitrios

Bodlaender, Hans; Fomin Fedor; Lokshtanov, Daniel; Eelko,

Improving local search using parameterized complexity

Daniel Marx (Budapest Univ. of Technology & Economics, HU)

Local search algorithms iteratively improve solutions by checking whether it
is possible to nd a better solution in the local neighborhood of the current
solution.

10

Jeremy Barbay, Rolf Klein, Alejandro Lopez-Ortiz and Rolf Niedermeier

The local neighborhood is usually dened as the set of solutions that can
be obtained by one (or more generally, at most k for some xed k) elementary
changes. Large values of k can give better results; however, the brute force search
of the local neighborhood is not feasible for larger k.

Parameterized complexity gives a convenient framework for studying the
question whether there is an ecient way of searching the local neighborhood.
In the talk, I will briey overview parameterized complexity, summarize recent
results in this direction, and explain in more detail the analysis of the problem
of nding minimum weight solutions for Boolean CSP.

Joint work with Andrei Krokhin.

Keywords: Parameterized complexity, local search, CSP

Selforganizing Linear Search Revisited

J. Ian Munro (University of Waterloo, CA)

In this meeting we focus on a variety of aspects of online methods and their
relation to adaptiveness and parametrized complexity. One important issue is
appropiate methods of comparing algorithms, including the notion of competitiveness.
 An issue often lost is that of the fundamental model and charging
mechanism that online and oine methods are to follow. We revist the work of
Martinez et al and of the author that demonstrate that no algorithm for selforganizing 
linear search is better than n/lgn competitive if our model permits
us to scan down the list (at least to the desired element) at a charge of one per
element inspected, and then reorder the inspected values at no charge.

Keywords: Competitive, selforganizing, online

Adaptive algorithms for planar convex hull problems

Yoshio Okamoto (Tokyo Institute of Technology, JP)

We study problems in computational geometry from the viewpoint of adaptive
algorithms. Adaptive algorithms have been extensively studied for the sorting
problem, and in this paper we generalize the framework to geometric problems.
To this end, we think of geometric problems as permutation (or rearranging)
problems of arrays, and dene the presortedness as a distance from the input
array to the desired output array. We call an algorithm adaptive if it runs faster
when a given input array is closer to the desired output, and furthermore it
does not make use of any information of the presortedness. As a case study,
we look into the planar convex hull problem for which we discover two natural
formulations as permutation problems.

Adaptive, Output Sensitive, Online and Parameterized Algorithms

11

An interesting phenomenon that we prove is that for one formulation the
problem can be solved adaptively, but for the other formulation no adaptive
algorithm can be better than an optimal outputsensitive 
algorithm for the
planar convex hull problem.

Joint work of: Hee-Kap Ahn; Okamoto, Yoshio

Parameterized Approximation Schemes for Batch
Coloring

Hadas Shachnai (Technion - Haifa, IL)

Batch scheduling of conicting jobs is modeled by batch coloring of a graph.
Given an undirected graph and the number of colors required by each vertex, we
need to nd a proper batch coloring of the graph, namely, to partition the vertices
to batches which are independent sets and assign to each batch a contiguous set
of colors, whose size is equal to the maximum color requirement of any vertex
in this batch.

When the objective is to minimize the sum of job completion times, we
get the batch sum coloring problem; when we want to minimize the maximum
completion time of any job (or, the makespan) we get the max coloring problem.
Given the hardness of batch coloring on general graphs, already for the special
case of unit color requirements (known as sum coloring and the classic graph
coloring problem, respectively), it is natural to seek out classes of graphs where
eective solutions can be obtained eciently.

We give the rst (parameterized) polynomial time approximation schemes
for batch sum coloring on several classes of non-thick graphs that arise in
applications. This includes partial k-trees, planar graphs and other at" graphs.

Joint work with Magnus M. Halldorsson.

Keywords:
schemes

Batch sum coloring, max coloring, parameterized approximation

