Video Game Design for Mobile Phones 

Jaime Sánchez and Matías Espinoza 

 Department of Computer Science, Center for Advanced Research in Education (CARE) 

University of Chile 

Blanco Encalada 2120, Santiago, Chile 

jsanchez@dcc.uchile.cl, mespinoza@c5.cl 

Abstract.  This  article  explores  the  use  of  mobile  phones  for  educational  purposes 
through the design, development and evaluation of Role Playing Games 
(RPG).  To  accomplish  this,  we  differentiated  between  the  functionality  and  
design of the videogame, developing a videogame engine and videogames prototypes.
 Thus the engine was responsible for controlling the videogame’s functionalities 
regarding the prototypes designed. Once designed and developed, a 
usability  evaluation  of  the  videogames  with  end-users  was  administered.  Results 
show that the videogames implemented were usable, easy and pleasant to 
use, and that they fully motivated learners as mobile learning tools.  

Keywords: cell phone, mobile, RPG, videogame, problem solving. 

1   Introduction 

Videogames have a significant educational potential, as in addition to motivating students 
they allow people to learn and develop skills, abilities and strategies [3]. There 
are  wide-ranging possibilities for applying  videogames to  learning. Some aspects in 
which  videogames  can  contribute  to  learning  are:  knowledge  of  digital  literacy, 
videogame skills through problem solving, comprehension skills and academic abilities,
 among others [3][2]. 

In an RPG (Role-Playing Game) videogame, the player takes on a specific role in a 
storyline  through  a  character  who  lives  in  a  virtual  world.  The  storyline  develops 
based on the decisions and actions taken by the player during the game. The character 
can  gain  experience,  specific  items  or  other  characteristics  as  the  game  develops. 
Through the interaction with an RPG videogame, one can take advantage of the educational 
potential regarding the development of skills and the learning of content by 
carrying out the tasks that are assigned within the videogame.  

In  this  way,  the  research  objective  of  our  work  is  the  development  of  an  
educational, RPG videogame engine for mobile cellular phones that defines the characteristics 
 and  functionalities  for  the  various  videogames  that  can  be  designed  and 
implemented  using  such  a  platform.  This  is  in  order  to  obtain  a  tool  that  supports 
school learning through the stimulation of the user’s problem solving abilities. In order 
to achieve this objective, a usability evaluation of two videogame prototypes created 
using the educational RPG videogame engine for mobile phones was carried out.  

P. Forbrig, F. Paternó, and A. Mark-Pejtersen (Eds.): HCIS 2010, IFIP AICT 332, pp. 199–210, 2010. 
© IFIP International Federation for Information Processing 2010 

200 

J. Sánchez and M. Espinoza 

In the following we present a review of the pertinent literature that was carried out 
based on the issues that make up the primary influences for our work. Afterwards, the 
engine and the videogames developed are described, and the evaluation of the prototypes 
is presented. Finally, we finish by establishing some conclusions based on our 
results.  

2   Literature Review 

Computers, PDAs, mobile phones and other technological artifacts all make up part of 
the way in which work, social relations, the creation of knowledge, learning and education 
have been transformed in recent decades [2]. In particular, mobile phones have 
been massified intensely in recent years, and the number of applications developed for 
these devices has increased. As a result, the general use of these applications has also 
become more widespread. The use of mobile phones in education can be considered 
as part of the evolution of the use of these devices. In addition, due to the massification 
of  mobile phones, there  is currently a student/phone ratio of almost 1:1,  which 
represents a great opportunity to develop applications oriented towards education that 
are based on this kind of technology. Mobile phones are characterized by being light 
and portable, and are adequate for working while walking or even in uncomfortable 
places  [4],  and  they  can  be  used  both  inside  and  outside  of  the  classroom.  Despite 
their low processing speed, reduced screen size and unsatisfactory capacity for storage 
and volatile memory [4], these devices have what is needed to be able to manage 
information, generate collaboration and foment the construction of knowledge in both 
formal  and  informal  situations,  while  being  subject  to  the  previously  mentioned  
restrictions. 

Through the use of an RPG videogame, learning activities such as imitation, feedback,
 training, practice, case  reviews, incremental challenges and immersion can be 
carried  out,  among  others  [10].  Such  activities  involve  the  development  of  problem 
solving  skills,  specific  content,  and  communication  and  concentration  abilities 
[6][1][7][21][5]. 

It  is  interesting  to  explore  the  educational  potential  of  videogames,  in  which  the 
student  learns  from  the  experiences  gained  through  the  tasks  that  he/she  carries  out 
within  the  videogame,  thus  breaking  with  the  traditional  teaching  scheme  [8][15]. 
This points clearly to the sense of the expectations held by children today, in that they 
are immersed in a world that is surrounded by technology and multimedia elements, 
made stronger by a high degree of interactivity. These expectations are a very important 
factor, which makes the traditional educational system look irrelevant to the lives 
of today’s students. In this search  for new  educational  media, it has been sought to 
attract children to learning through an RPG videogame for mobile phones, contributing 
to an improvement in the traditional ways of learning [10][11][12][14][13]. 

Conceptually speaking, doing an exercise and solving a problem are not the same. 
In exercises, an algorithm or routine process is applied in a mechanical manner. Solving 
a problem means providing a coherent explanation for a set of related information 
in  a  specific  context.  To  do  this,  one  must  pause,  reflect  and  even  execute  original 
actions  that  have  not  previously  been  practiced  in  order  to  reach  a  solution  to  the  
 

 

Video Game Design for Mobile Phones 

201 

problem. Polya points out that problem solving is a process that implies the consideration 
of 4 steps [9]: 1. Comprehension and Identification of the problem; 2. Creation of 
a plan to solve the problem; 3. Carrying out a plan to solve the problem; 4. Evaluation 
of the solution to the problem. 

In the design of an RPG videogame it is convenient to follow good practices in order 
to construct  the  storyline. With regards to this aspect,  our  work considers some 
guidelines  for  the  creation  of  hyperstories  [16][17],  as  well  as  a  contribution  to  the 
design of the software to be developed.   

Finally, some previously developed videogames were taken into account as a reference 
for some characteristics to consider and incorporate into the proposed engine 
and the videogame prototypes developed. Link [18] and The Natomy's Journey [20] 
are  RPG  videogames  that  present  a  simple  level  of  play  in  which  the  player  exchanges 
 items  during  the  development  of  the  videogame  in  order  to  fulfill  his/her 
mission in the context of an educational objective. On the other hand, BuinZoo and 
Museo  [18]  are  software  programs  for  Pocket  PC  and  Classmate  computers  that 
consist of a quiz-type videogame that are developed while at a visit to the zoo or a 
museum; questions on the different issues are asked, and the information necessary 
to  answer  the  questions  are  located  within  the  physical  environment  that  is  being 
visited,  which  is  an  interesting  support  characteristic  for  a  mobile  phone-based 
videogame.  

3   The Engine and the Videogames  

The educational, RPG videogame engine developed in this study allows for the development 
of videogames with different themes, but identical functionalities and characteristics.
 In this way, the videogames were designed for individual use, and the user 
can navigate freely through the virtual world that the videogames offer in the available 
scenarios. 

The engine integrates different functionalities that characterize the videogames that 

were developed. Of these, the most significant are: 
Elements: Visually, the videogames present the user with a virtual world made up of 
Scenarios, in  which a Main  Character (the person controlled by the  user) can  move 
about freely, and in which we can find several different elements such as Characters 
(not controlled by the user), Items (can be used for different purposes) and Decorations 
(delimit and decorate the scenarios). Other elements that are visible to the user 
are the dialogues between the Characters, which appear as information and/or questions 
referring to a problem that the player needs to solve. 
Interactions: When the Main Character collides with other elements in the Scenario, 
the following kinds of interactions can be presented: Inform, Describe, Ask, Pick up 
and  Trade  (see  table  1).  An  interaction  only  occurs  when  there  is  a  collision  with 
some element in the game, and when certain conditions are met the user can change 
from one interaction to another, if it is available. 
Playability: The engine allows the videogames to present the users with challenges, 
providing them with problem-solving issues, and obligating them to make decisions.  
 

202 

J. Sánchez and M. Espinoza 

The quality of the videogame, in this way, depends a lot on the design of the hyperstory 
[16]. Playability is determined by the characteristics of the Interactions together 
with  the  incorporation  of  problem  solving  aspects.  Structurally,  the  videogame  is 
made up of a Mission or Central Objective, which presents the player with a global 
problem to solve. The problem is solved when the player completes a minimum number 
 of  sequential  Tasks,  which  are  specific  objectives  within  the  videogame  and 
which correspond to shorter-term problem-solving issues. There is a “minimum num-
ber” of Tasks because the user can simultaneously carry out other tasks in the videogame 
that are complementary and that are not strictly necessary in order to complete 
the Mission. A Task is made up of a sequence of Interactions, each of which corresponds 
to a node of the hyper-story. 

Table 1. Possible interactions when a main character collides with the different elements 

Interaction 
Inform 
Describe 
Trade 

Pick up 

Ask 

Description 
The element provides information that is relevant to the videogame 
The element describes itself 
The element presents a problem that requires a certain item as a response, and awards 
another item as a prize 
The element presents a problem that requires a certain item as a response, and awards 
the element itself as a prize in the form of an additional item 
The element asks a multiple-choice question, and awards an item as a prize for providing 
the correct answer 

Character 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

Item 
Yes 
Yes 
No 

Decoration 
Yes 
Yes 
No 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

No 

No 

3.1   Interfaces 

3.1.1   Screen 
The size (in pixels  with dimensions x and y) of the graphic objects on the screen is 
fixed, and no proportional adjustments are made when the size of the screen is smaller 
or larger.  

The screen shows a portion of the entire Scenario, which we will denominate the 
clip. The size of the clip is assigned with dimensions that are the size of the display on 
the device, which is obtained when opening the videogame. In figure 1A we can appreciate 
the visible areas for different screen resolutions: Area I is for 128x128 pixel 
resolution, Areas I and II are for 128x160 pixel resolution, and Areas I, II and III are 
for 240x320 pixel resolution.  

3.1.2   Entry Buttons 
In order to keep the control of the actions within the videogame as simple as possible, 
we opted to use only joystick buttons, which are identified as: up button, down button, 
left button, right button and fire button (see figure 1B): 
•  Movement of the Main Character: up, down, left and right buttons. 
•  Continue after the Inform and Describe Interactions: fire button. 
•  Select one of the alternatives available in the Pick up, Trade and Respond Interac-

tions: left and right buttons. 

•  Confirm a correct alternative in the Pick up, Trade and Respond Interactions: fire 

button.  

•  Perform a Scroll of the text shown in the interactions: up and down buttons.  

 

 

Video Game Design for Mobile Phones 

203 

Fig. 1. (A) Clip of a scenario for different resolutions (B) Joystick buttons on a mobile phone 

 

3.2    Prototypes  

Two  videogame  prototypes  were  developed  using  the  videogame  engine,  which  we 
will call prototype 1 and prototype 2. 

In prototype 1 a scenario was created with a simple story involving two characters 
and one item. The mission consists of capturing a Cockroach, and to do so the Main 
Character must previously obtain a Torch, which can be obtained without any prerequisites.
 There is a Tortoise that asks a question once the Cockroach has been captured.   

Fig. 2. Images from the maps of (A) Prototype 1 and (B) Prototype 2 

 

In prototype 2, a visibly more extensive videogame was developed (see figure 2) 
with 13 characters, which involved three interactions for each one. This game developed 
the issue of nutrition as an educational objective. The mission for this prototype 
consists of getting off of an island, and to do this the player must get a pilot into an 
airplane.  The  pilot  cannot  get  on  the  plane  immediately  because  there  is  a  dog  that 
does not let him get near to it. Thus the pre-condition for the pilot’s Interaction is to 
have captured the dog, and having completed this, the videogame is over. While the 
Main Character has still not captured the dog, the pilot presents a dialogue expressing 
that he cannot get close to his plane. On the other hand, the dog wants to be fed with a 
protein-rich food. In the videogame, three kinds of protein-rich food can be obtained: 
eggs, fish and meat. However, the meat is what satisfies the dog, and when he is fed a 
portion of meat, he is captured.  

In  the  same  way  that  the  dog  asks  for  his  food  (a  protein-rich  food),  the  other 
Characters  ask  for  Items  by  presenting  a  problem  consistent  with  each  Character’s 
need  to  obtain  a  specific  food  with  certain  nutritional  characteristics.  As  such,  the 
Characters provide one item in exchange for another Item, cloaking the exchange in a 

204 

J. Sánchez and M. Espinoza 

need presented as a problem, and providing clues for the answer but never asking for 
the Item by its specific name (see table 2).  

Table 2. Characters and problems presented  

Presents a problem asking for 

Base ingredient to make bread 
Cereal-based food that is rich in carbohydrates 
Free the way to the plane that is blocked by the dog
Vegetarian lunch rich in vitamins 
- 
- 
Sweet concentrate food 
Her lost hen 
- 

Character 
Baker 
Butcher 
Pilot 
Fisherman 
Bee Farmer 
Corn Girl 
Lettuce Girl 
Business Girl 
Apple Boy 
Wind Mill Boy  Raw material needed to produce flour 
Farmer 
Dog 
Hen 

Sweet, protein-rich food 
Protein-rich food 
Cereal-type food 

4   Usability Evaluation 

This evaluation was focused on the characteristics of the videogame engine, using the 
two previously described test prototypes.  

First,  prototype  1  was  evaluated  regarding  baseline  characteristics  of  the  videogame 
engine such as the behavior of the interactive elements and the main character’s 
movement, as well as the use of the most complicated controls such as the text scroll 
and the multiple choice selection. This  was done because it was necessary to detect 
problems  in  order  to  redesign  and  improve  the  various  aspects  of  the  application  
interfaces.  

Second, prototype 2 was tested by evaluating all of the characteristics of the videogame.
 The high number of elements and interactions in this version put the playability 
of the videogame to the test. For this reason, it was convenient to evaluate the level of 
acceptance of the videogame, and to detect design problems.  

4.1   Objectives 

The  objective  consisted  of  detecting,  correcting  problems  with  and  validating  the 
characteristics  of  the  videogames  developed  using  the  videogame  engine  designed, 
through the evaluation of the design of the main elements, the level of playability, the 
use  of  interactive  material  in  general,  the  use  of  controls  in  the  main  character’s 
movements, the text scroll in the dialogues and in the selection of the multiple choice 
alternatives.  

4.2   Participants 

There were two groups of students from different grade-levels of general, elementary 
school  education,  with  ages  that  fluctuated  between  9  and  11  years  old.  Group  one 
was  made  up  of  nine  students  (three  girls  and  six  boys),  all  of  who  had  experience 
with the use of mobile phones. Group two was made up of ten students (nine girls and 
one boy), all of which also had previous experience using mobile phones.  

 

Video Game Design for Mobile Phones 

205 

An engineer who had participated in the development of the engine and the videogames 
acted as an evaluator during the evaluation of the prototypes.  

4.3   Instruments  

Observation questionnaire 1: seeks to obtain a record of the actions associated with 
the  interactions  with  the  main  elements,  with  which  it  is  sought  to  detect  problems 
regarding  the  playability  and  the  use  of  the  controls  of  the  videogame.  The  actions 
recorded  were:  if  the  student  asked  what  to  do  with  each  element,  if  in  interacting 
with each element the student used the text scroll, if he/she pressed the Fire button to 
close the dialogue with the element, if the student pressed the Fire button for another 
action  that  had  not  been  implemented,  and  if  he/she  performed  the  expected  action 
with each element.  
User feedback questionnaire: this questionnaire was inspired by some of the openended 
questions from the end user evaluation questionnaire for blind students [15]. In 
this  case,  the  questions  were  centered  on  the  elements  of  the  prototype,  asking  the 
students if they liked each one, with possible answers of: yes, so-so, and no. In addition,
 some open-ended questions were incorporated, which can be seen in the results 
section. With these questions it was sought to evaluate the users’ opinions on the design,
 playability, the use of the controls and the interactive material of the videogame.  
End  user  evaluation  questionnaire:  consists  of  an  adaptation  of  a  summarized 
evaluation questionnaire regarding software for blind students [21], in which the specific 
 questions  designed  to  measure  the  interpretation  of  the  sounds  were  replaced 
with  questions  that  seek  to  measure  the  interpretation  of  the  images.  The  original 
questions, “I like the software’s sounds”, “The software’s sounds are clearly identifi-
able” and “The software’s sounds provide me with information”, were replaced with 
the questions “I like the videogame’s images”, “The videogame’s images are clearly 
identifiable”,  and  “The  videogame’s  images  provide  me  with  information”,  respectively.
 In addition,  within this questionnaire the  word “software”  was replaced  with 
“videogame”  wherever  it  appeared.  This  questionnaire  also  includes  a  section  with 
open-ended questions. Through the use of this questionnaire, it is sought to evaluate 
the quality of the videogame based on the user’s satisfaction regarding issues of design,
 playability, the use of controls, and the interactive material of the videogame.    
Observation questionnaire 2: with the use of this questionnaire it is sought to measure 
the use of the functionalities, in which the evaluator answers the following questions 
 with  Yes  or  No  regarding  the  user’s  performance:  The  user  correctly  uses  the 
movement controls, The user navigates the map, The user interacts with the characters,
  The  user  interacts  with  the  decorations,  The  user  at  some  point  uses  the  text 
scroll,  The  user  selects  the  multiple  choice  alternatives,  The  user  obtains  the  items 
he/she is looking for, The user understands the relation between the item sought after 
and the character that needs it. These questions seek to evaluate and validate the controls,
  the  playability  of  the  application  and  the  interaction  with  the  elements  of  the 
videogame.  

4.4   Procedure  

The usability tests were separated into two different moments, first to test prototype 1 
with  the  application  being  developed  and  then  to  test  prototype  2  with  the  final  

206 

J. Sánchez and M. Espinoza 

application including the changes redesigned and incorporated as a result of the first 
evaluation. In order to perform the usability tests, the necessary copies of the previously 
 described  instruments  were  printed  out  on  paper.  In  addition,  for  both  of  the 
evaluations a Nokia 6230 mobile phone was used, with both prototype 1 and prototype 
2 installed.  

First the usability evaluation was applied individually in group one in the following 
steps: 1. Verbal instructions on what was to be done in the videogame and on the controls 
for the videogame were provided to each student; 2. The interactions performed 
in the videogame were recorded in the observation questionnaire 1; 3. When a student 
had doubts on what he/she had to do, instructions were provided that would allow him 
or  her  to  continue  playing;  4.  Finally,  the  user  feedback  questionnaire  was  applied 
verbally. The evaluator read the questions out loud, and the answers were recorded on 
the same sheet.  

Afterwards,  the  usability  evaluation  was  applied  individually  in  group  two  using 
the  following  steps:  1.  Verbal  instructions  were  provided  to  each  student  regarding 
what had to be done in the videogame, and on the controls for the videogame; 2. Each 
student  played  for  about  7  minutes;  3.  The  student’s  performance  in  the  different 
functionalities  were  recorded  in  the  observation  questionnaire  2;  4.  When  a  student 
had doubts on what he/she had to do, instructions were provided that would allow him 
or her to continue playing; and 5. After the 7 minutes of playing time had passed, the 
students were invited to fill in the end user evaluation questionnaire.  

4.5   Results 

The results for the initial tests showed that the interaction with the videogame environment 
was highly intuitive, as very little was asked about what they had to do, and 
in  general  they  were  able  to  discover  things  in  the  videogame  through  exploration 
alone. Because of this, it  was not  necessary to add special guides  within the  videogame 
regarding this aspect.  

No
0

So-So

2

Yes
4

6

8

10

Did you like the images?

Did you like the animatio ns?

Did you like the texts?

Did you like the telephone's co ntro l butto ns?

Did you like the co ntro l of the main character?

Did you like the videogame's modality?

Fig. 3. Summary of the results of the user feedback questionnaire 

 

The entry buttons for the videogame’s controls and for the main character’s movements 
were unanimously accepted (see figure 3), which provides support for the choice 
adopted in the videogame design. However, the use of the controls for the text scroll 

 

Video Game Design for Mobile Phones 

207 

and  the  selection  of  the  multiple-choice  alternatives  (interaction  with  the  Tortoise) 
were not intuitive, as no users performed the text scroll and only two users were able to 
execute the action for the selection of the multiple-choice answer. For this reason, in 
the prototype 2 we avoided using extensive dialogues that would make it necessary to 
use the text scroll, and guides were added that indicated that the left and right buttons 
could be used to perform the selection of the multiple-choice alternatives.  

The interactive elements (images, animations and texts) were well received by the 
students (see figure 3), for which reason we maintained the same line with regards to 
this aspect. 

From the answers to the open-ended questions of the user feedback questionnaire, 
we were able to conclude that the students understood that the objective of the videogame 
consists of capturing the cockroach with the torch. This is good because it implies 
that they were able to identify a basic aspect of the game’s playability, namely 
obtaining  and  using  things  in  order  to  obtain  other  things.  When  asked  what  the 
videogame could be useful for, the students did not perceive any educational utility; 
they only expressed that it would be useful for entertainment, which presents a challenge 
for the second prototype in order to improve the sensation that the game leaves 
the users with. Also, in answering these questions the students suggested adding more 
trees, plants, bushes, vegetation and other elements in order to confuse the user, to be 
able to change characters, and increasing the difficulty of the game. This means that 
they wanted more interactive elements in the videogame. Faced with this scenario, for 
prototype 2 a more wide-ranging hyperstory was proposed, with more elements and a 
higher degree of complexity regarding the solution to the game, incorporating a baseline 
educational framework.  

Average

0

2

4

6

8

I like the game
The game is fun
The videogame is challenging
The videogame makes me active
I would work with the videogame again
I would recommend this videogame to other students
I learned from using the videogame
I felt I could control the situations in the videogame
I knew what to do at every step in the videogame 
The videogame is interactive
The videogame is easy to use
The videogame is motivating
The videogame adapts to my rhythm
The videogame allowed me to understand new things
I like the images of the videogame
The images of the videogame are clearly identifiable
The images of the videogame provide me with information

10

9,5

8,6

7,5

8,4
8,6
8,5

8,2

7,2

8,8

8,3

8

8,7

7,8

8,8
9,1
8,9

8,1

  

Fig.  4.  Results  of  the  end  user  evaluation  questionnaire,  showing  the  average  percentage  of 
each indicator on a scale of 1 to 10 points 

208 

J. Sánchez and M. Espinoza 

From the second usability tests, the results obtained from the application of the observation 
 questionnaire  2  show  that,  in  general,  the  videogames’  functionalities  are 
appropriately used by the students, according to the criteria of what was expected by 
the videogame designer. However, the text scroll continues to be a low point, and it is 
necessary to seek new ways in order to improve the use of this function.    

The results collected from the end user questionnaires (see figure 4) are very good 
for each of the indicators of acceptance, which validates the choices regarding design, 
playability, and control of the videogame, in addition to the materials used.   

In the answers to the questions included in the end user acceptance questionnaire, 
the students were shown to like various aspects of the videogame, such as “looking 
for  the  things  that  people  ask  for  and  need”,  “giving  food  to  the  dog”,  “providing 
other people with things”, “the adventure format of the videogame”, “the characters”, 
“the playing fields”, “helping people”, and “it is fun”. They also expressed their opinions 
on the elements of the videogame that they did not  like, such as  “when it  was 
hard to find the things that people asked for”, “there were no instructions”, “there was 
no friend for the main character”, and “people asked for too many things”. The students 
 suggested  adding  various  aspects  to  the  videogame,  such  as:  “the  characters 
should talk more”, “the game should be bigger”, “more instructions”, “more charac-
ters”,  “more  problems”,  “a  character  that  helps  the  main  character”,  “a  pretty  girl”, 
“more  things  to  eat”  and  “more  elements  that  can  do  other  things”.  They  also  expressed 
their general opinions on the videogame, with statements such as, “I liked the 
videogame”, “it is very good”, “the videogame was incredible”, “it was very good”, 
and  “it  is  recommendable”.  These  results  show  that  the  students  had  very  positive 
feelings  for  the  videogame,  its  playability  and  the  elements  that  were  available  to 
them. However, the students demand a more wide-ranging and complete videogame, 
with more characters, more dialogues, more items and new functions, in addition to 
improving  the  videogame’s  instructions.  When  asked  what  the  videogame  could  be 
useful for, the students answered, “to know about different harvests”, “to know more 
about animals”, “to learn”, “to learn to look for things”, “to learn to navigate the different 
parts of the  videogame”, “to teach”,  “to help”, and “to discover  new things”. 
This represents a very interesting result, in that the students clearly perceive that the 
videogame  is  related  to  learning  activities  and  different  kinds  of  objectives,  which 
represents notable progress when compared to prototype 1.  

5   Conclusions 

In our  work  we successfully  and satisfactorily  fulfilled our objectives to design and 
implement an educational, RPG videogame engine. This engine offers a set of functionalities 
 that  allow  for  an  educational,  RPG  videogame  to  be  developed  within  it. 
The  engine  was  developed  and  used  for  the  creation  of  prototypes  1  and  2,  which 
were tested with end users.  

Another one of the proposed objectives was to support the development of the application 
through the usability evaluation of the educational, RPG videogames during 
the different stages of development. With this we were able to improve the design of 
the application as it was being developed, and at the same time justify design and implementation 
decisions that were supported by the results of the evaluations.  

 

Video Game Design for Mobile Phones 

209 

The results of the usability evaluations show that the students adopted the interaction 
with the different elements of the videogame naturally. They were able to explore 
the virtual world and the possibilities offered by the videogame. This is supported by 
the simplicity of the choice for the videogame’s controls, which represented a strong 
point in the evaluations regarding the facility of its use, with the exception of the text 
scroll, for  which an acceptable improvement is  still pending. Together  with this aspect,
 the playability was also well received by the students, who understood that the 
dynamic of the videogame consists of providing things to the different Characters and 
receiving other things in exchange, being able to effectively stimulate their problemsolving 
abilities. Finally, we add that in general the students associated the videogame 
with being useful for learning-related activities. Thus, from these results we can infer 
that this educational, RPG videogame engine can be exploited for the development of 
videogames that support school learning through the stimulation of the user’s prob-
lem-solving abilities.  

The  students’  opinions  from  the  application  of  the  end  user  evaluation  questionnaires 
 showed  a  very  high  level  of  acceptance  of  the  videogame,  validating  the 
choices  regarding  design,  playability,  the  control  of  the  videogame,  as  well  as  the 
materials  used.  This  translates  into  a  high  level  of  motivation  to  use  this  tool  for  
learning.  

It is important to point out that the sample of users utilized to apply the end user 
evaluation questionnaire is not representative in terms of  quantity. In this sense,  we 
propose  future  work  to  evaluate  such  games  with  more  users  in  order  to  assure  the 
acceptance of the applications developed.  

In  addition,  the  usability  evaluations  allowed  us  to  propose  substantial  improvements 
 to  the  functionalities  of  the  videogame  engine.  This  allows  the  videogames 
developed to be more appropriate regarding  the  interests and  ways of interacting of 
the end users.  

Although the evaluation of the videogame engine was not the initial focus of our 
work, this could be an interesting aspect to evaluate in the future with a small sample 
of  videogame  designers  and  developers.  However,  the  design,  implementation  and 
evaluation of the characteristics of the videogame engine used in the two prototypes 
involved  in  this  project,  represent  guidelines  that  can  be  used  by  the  designers  and 
developers of educational RPG videogames for mobile phones.  

We also propose future work that includes a cognitive test of the application, in order 
to be able to measure the effect that the  use of this application has on learning. 
The videogame engine provides for certain aspects of learning through the available 
functionalities, such as the construction of questions and the presentation of information 
with specific content. To deal with these aspects, we intend to perform a future 
evaluation of the level of significance regarding the impact that the videogame engine 
has  on  users’  learning.  With  this  we  would  be  able  to  completely  sustain  our  main 
objective regarding the development of a tool that  supports school learning through 
the stimulation of the user’s problem-solving skills.    
 
Acknowledgments. This report was funded by the Chilean National Fund of Science 
and Technology, Fondecyt #1090352 and Project CIE-05 Program Center Education 
PBCT-Conicyt. 

210 

J. Sánchez and M. Espinoza 

References  

1.  Eriksson,  Y.,  Gärdenfors,  D.:  Computer  games  for  children  with visual  impairments.  In: 
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Disability, Virtual Reality and Associated 
Technologies, New College, Oxford, UK, September 20-22, pp. 79–86 (2004) 

2.  Gros, B., Bernat, A.: Videojuegos y aprendizaje. Graó, Barcelona (2008) 
3.  Gros,  B.,  Aguayos,  J.:  Pantallas,  juegos  y  educación:  La  alfabetización  digital  en  la  

escuela. Desclée de Brouwer, Bilbao (2004) 

4.  Guerrero,  L.,  Ochoa,  S.,  Pino,  J.:  Selecting  Computing  Devices  to  Support  Mobile  Collaboration.
 Group Decision and Negotiation 15(3), 243–271 (2006) 

5.  Kelly, H., Howell, K., Glinert, E., Holding, L., Swain, C., Burrowbridge, A., Roper, M.: 

How to Build Serious Games. Communication of the ACM 20(7), 45–49 (2007) 

6.  Klopfer, E., Yoon, S.: Developing Games and Simulations for Today and Tomorrow’s tech Savvy 

Youth TechTrends. Linking Research & Practice to Improve Learning 49(3), 33–41 (2005) 

7.  McDonald, K., Hannafin, R.: Using web-based computer games to meet the demands of 
today’s high stakes testing: A mixed method inquiry. Journal of Research on Technology 
in Education 55(4), 459–472 (2003) 

8.  McMichael, A.: PC Games and the Teaching of History. The History Teacher 40(2), 203–

218 (2007) 

9.  Polya, G.: How to solve it. Doubleday and Co., Inc., Garden City (1957) 
10.  Prensky, M.: Digital Game-Based Learning. McGraw-Hill, New York (2001) 
11.  Prensky, M.: Digital Natives. Digital Immigrants Part 1: On The Horizon - The Strategic 

Planning Resource for Education Professionals 9(5), 1–6 (2001) 

12.  Prensky,  M.:  Digital  Natives.  Digital  Immigrants  Part  2:  Do  They  Really  Think  Differ-

ently? On the Horizon 9(6), 1–6 (2001) 

13.  Prensky, M.: Engage Me or Enrage Me: What Today’s Learners Demand. Educause Review 
40(5), 60, 62,64 (2005) 

14.  Prensky, M.: Listen to the Natives. Educational Leadership 63(4), 8–13 (2006) 
15.  Proserpio, L., Viola, D.: Teaching the virtual generation. Academy of Management Learning 
& Education 6(1), 69–80 (2007) 

16.  Lumbreras, M., Sánchez, J.: Hyperstories: A model to specify and design interactive educational 
 stories.  In:  En  Baeza,  R.  (ed.)  Computer  Science,  USA,  pp.  135–146.  Editorial 
IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos (1997) 

17.  Sánchez, J., Lumbreras, M., Bibbo, L.: Hyperstories for learning. In: En Nanard, M. (ed.) 
Workshop in Computing, Hypermedia Design. Springer, Heidelberg (1996), ISBN 3-540-
199-85-3 

18.  Sánchez, J., Elías, M.: Science Learning in Blind Children through Audio-Based Games. 
In: Redonde, M., Bravo, C., Ortega, M. (eds.) Engineering the User Interaction: From Research 
to Practice, pp. 87–102. Springer, London (2008) 

19.  Sánchez,  J.,  Mendoza,  C.,  Salinas,  A.:  Mobile  serious  games  for  collaborative  problem 
solving. In: Brenda, K. (ed.) Wiederhold and Giuseppe Riva (Editors) the Annual Review 
of  Cybertherapy  and  Telemedicine  2009.  Studies  in  Health  Technology  and  Informatics 
(SHTI) Series, vol. 144, pp. 193–197. IOS Press, Amsterdam (2009) 

20.  Sánchez,  J., Sáenz,  M.: Video  Gaming  for  Blind  Learners  School  Integration  in  Science 
Classes. In: Gross, T., Gulliksen, J., Kotzé, P., Oestreicher, L., Palanque, P., Prates, R.O., 
Winckler, M. (eds.) INTERACT 2009, Part I. LNCS, vol. 5726, pp. 36–49. Springer, Heidelberg 
(2009) 

21.  Sánchez, J., Salinas, A., Sáenz, M.: Mobile Game-Based Methodology for Science Learning.
  In:  Jacko,  J.A.  (ed.)  HCI  2007,  Part  IV.  LNCS,  vol. 4553,  pp.  322–331.  Springer,  
Heidelberg (2007) 

22.  Sanchez,  J.:  End-user  and  facilitator  questionnaire  for  Software  Usability.  In:  Usability 

Evaluation Test. University of Chile, Santiago (2003) 

