Mobile Audio Games Accessibility Evaluation

for Users Who Are Blind

Maria C.C. Ara´ujo1(B), Agebson R. Fa¸canha1, Ticianne G.R. Darin1,

Jaime S´anchez2, Rossana M.C. Andrade1, and Windson Viana1

1 Graduate Program in Computer Science,
Federal University of Ceara, Fortaleza, Brazil

mariaaraujo@great.ufc.br, agebson@ifce.edu.br,

{ticianne,windson}@virtual.ufc.br, rossana@ufc.br

2 Department of Computer Science, University of Chile, Santiago, Chile

jsanchez@dcc.uchile.cl

Abstract. Digital games have become increasingly popular for both
entertainment and education purposes. However, making these games
universal and accessible poses a challenge for interface designers and
game developers, since they are usually unfamiliar with the peculiarities
of gamers who are blind. More eﬀort is necessary for contributing to a
universal game design and, ultimately, helping to promote the inclusion
of people with disabilities to take full advantages of digital games. In this
research, we present a study concerning existent guidelines and recommendations 
for accessibility in digital games. As a result, we propose ten
recommendations for the design of mobile audio games, targeting gamers
who are blind. We also present an evaluation instrument assembled from
the recommendations we propose. We used this instrument to assess ten
audio games labeled as inclusive. Results indicate that only three from
a total of ten games were considered “good”, which means they met the
fundamental aspects of the guidelines.

1 Introduction

During the past decades, the way of enjoying the playful universe of digital
games evolved regarding style, meaning, and available platforms (e.g., arcades,
consoles, PCs, mobile devices). In turn, the purpose of games has been widened
beyond sheer entertainment. For instance, we can ﬁnd games as learning support
software (edugames), marketing tools (advergames), or even games for improving
physical conditioning (ﬁtness games) [19,22]. Digital games are now more socially
relevant than when they were conceived. Despite performing a signiﬁcant social
role in many sectors and communities, most games do not contribute to the
inclusion of people with disabilities. In fact, the majority part of digital games
has not design, user interface, or mechanics adapted to gamers who have some
disability [12,32].

R.M.C. Andrade—Researcher scholarship - DT Level 2, sponsored by CNPq.

c(cid:2) Springer International Publishing AG 2017
M. Antona and C. Stephanidis (Eds.): UAHCI 2017, Part II, LNCS 10278, pp. 242–259, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-58703-5 18

Mobile Audio Games Accessibility Evaluation for Users Who Are Blind

243

According to the United Nations (UN), there are more than 600 million
people with some physical, cognitive, hearing, or visual disability in the world.
The World Health Organisation estimates 285 million inhabitants with visual
impairments. 40 million of them are totally blind. The majority (90%) live in
developing countries such as Brazil and India [1]. Game designers and developers
devote feeble eﬀorts for implementing accessibility in their games despite this
signiﬁcant number of people with disabilities [12,25].

Groups of researchers, game communities, and specialized game companies
have mobilized themselves to develop games targeting users with disabilities
in various platforms [3,32]. Some communities compile and make available such
games, such as the Game Accessibility Web sites1 and Audiogames.net2. Another
notorious initiative is the proposal of accessibility guidelines and recommendations 
for designers and game developers. However, the most important guidelines
available nowadays are scattered in many works and demand compilation.

In this research, we present a study concerning these guidelines and recommendations 
for accessibility in mobile games. The research focused on accessibility 
recommendations for gamers who are blind. As a result, we propose ten
recommendations for the design of mobile audio games, which are a set of games
in which the primary interaction occurs through audio.

In the ﬁrst phase of this research, we gathered and studied six collections
of guidelines. Then, we resumed these guidelines focused on the most relevant
accessibility characteristics provided in mobile audio games for users who are
blind. Based on this study, we identiﬁed ten recommendations that can be considered 
recurrent or minimal requirements to meet in the design and development
of a mobile audio game. These recommendations contain simple considerations
and design decisions that apply to most game mechanics. However, these are
the recommendations that beneﬁt the biggest number of players and are easy to
implement.

Moreover, we developed an evaluation instrument based on the Web Content
Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0 classiﬁcation and organization [24]. The
assessment instrument oﬀers a simpliﬁed way to evaluate the minimal accessibility 
requirements that a mobile audio game should meet. To validate the
instrument, we applied it to the evaluation of ten mobile audio games (e.g.,
Nebula, Inquisitor, GBraille Hangman). Finally, we implemented an evaluation
process with the assistance of two individuals who were blind. Results indicate
that only three from a total of ten games were considered “good”, i.e., met the
fundamental aspects of the guidelines. Two games were found unsatisfactory,
and three games were insuﬃcient mainly due to the absence of an audio tutorial
and no level conﬁguration available to the gamers.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Sect. 2, after the introduction,
 gives an explanation about accessibility in games in a broader context and
also discusses the audio games available for mobile devices. Next, Sect. 3 presents
the study of the Recommendations for Accessibility in Digital Games. Section 4

1 http://game-accessibility.com/game/.
2 http://audiogames.net/.

244

M.C.C. Ara´ujo et al.

details the assessment of ten audio games implemented using our instrument.
It also presents the results obtained by this evaluation. Section 5 takes up on
related works and, ﬁnally, Sect. 6 closes the paper showing ﬁnal considerations
and future work.

2 Game Accessibility

“Accessibility for games can be deﬁned as the ability to play a game despite
limiting conditions. Limiting conditions can be temporary functional limitations
or permanent disabilities - such as blindness, deafness or reduced mobility” [14].
Accessibility features in digital games are often limited to change of resolution,
 volume adjusts, subtitles activation, and remapping of game controllers [25].
These mechanisms promotes on some level the universal design of the games, but
several limitations are still unaddressed. Game audio is an important immersion
aspect. However, rarely, it receives the same attention received by the game visual
project. Frequently, sound feedback provided by games is not enough to indicate
all the essential information for understanding the scene or the possible navigation 
paths. Players who are blind also experiment a generalized incompatibility of
screen readers and games since these systems require access to hidden text descriptions 
in each element of interaction. Also, even players with low vision need options
for increasing the size or contrast of game elements [31,32].

2.1 Audio Games Accessibility

Audio games are focused on an audio-based gameplay. These techniques allow a
user to play a game without the need for a graphical user interface to understand
the game context or to interact with the application [7]. It is also important
to emphasize that these audio-based games are not always accessible due to
its target audience. For example, the game Zombie, Run! [29] is an immersive
running audio game in which users are put into zombie’s universe focused on a
street running.

Accessible audio games have as target audience people with visual impairments.
 These games reinforce audio solutions to guarantee the interaction. Originally,
 amateurs have developed the majority part of the accessible audio games.
They started with adaptations from existing games, trying to make them partially 
or entirely accessible. Nevertheless, they also aroused the interest of sound
artists, researchers, developers, and gamers [16]. Most of the audio games don’t
have a graphical interface. In some cases, a primary visual interface is available
since games can also aim at universal design. Then, people who are blind can
also play with or against people who are sighted.

The main characteristic of accessible audio games is the treatment of routines 
and narrative in games through sound resources. Games use both recorded
sounds or TTS (Text-To-Speech) techniques to generate audio from text information.
 In these games, the player can diﬀerentiate several sound patterns quickly.

Mobile Audio Games Accessibility Evaluation for Users Who Are Blind

245

Additionally, audio games could include tactile and haptic feedback (e.g., feedbacks 
with vibration or sound). With this approach, a complete game atmosphere
can be built, oﬀering to individuals who are blind a good level of interaction
[12,26,32].

Audio Quake, Serialization, and Audio Icons are the most commonly used

techniques to provide accessibility in audio games [3,26,33].

– Audio Quake - It simulates a radar and uses sound metaphors to indicate
the position of mobile and ﬁxed objects. For example, sounds are emitted
from the enemy’s position. They gain intensity (or alarms) according to the
approximation of the opponent [4]. Some authors indicates Audio Quake as
the ﬁrst adaptation technique produced [33].

– Serialisation - This technique treats game priorities in the sound playing.
Distinct levels of information (e.g., enemies, obstacles, etc.) have diﬀerent
levels of priority concerning sonorization time. Therefore, the correspondent
sounds should be serialized according to this priority, which indicates its
importance for the game comprehension. In that sense, several paradigms
of priority might be used in this technique [5,33].

– Audio Icons and Audio Cues - This technique proposes adding sound
eﬀects to the game (audio icons) or sound clues for promoting the object
identiﬁcation or for describing actions in the game [26,33]. For example, the
game plays a collision sound, and, just a few seconds later, it executes other
audio indicating that there is a wall in front of the gamer’s avatar [12].

– 3D Audio Cues - 3D audio cues use sound levels and sound source position
(e.g., sound from the north, from behind the user) for directional guidance.
Nowadays, smartphones and PCs have binaural audio, which reproduces 3D
eﬀect to systems that have 5.1 sound (5 channels for simple sounds - medium
and acute sounds - and a channel for deep sounds) in stereo headphones or
speakers. Frequently, this technique is combined with the other ones to provide 
a fully immersive 3D game. Nevertheless, games incorporating 3D audio
and directional simulation may not always provide high-quality experience,
since it also depends on the user’s device audio system (speakers position,
headphone quality) [12].

There are several academic work related to developing of audio games that
incorporate these techniques [7,8,18,27,28]. For example, Audiopolis [28], a
game focused on stimulating navigation and orientation abilities in a virtual
city by interaction with audio and tactile interfaces.

Web repositories maintained by users communities contains a list of accessible
audio games. Take as an example the website Augiogames.net, an international
repository with more than 100 games (http://www.audiogames.net/). The available 
games range from adaptations of board games (e.g., chess) to RPG (Role
Playing Games) and action games. For example, “Nicolas Eymerich, Inquisitor”
is a PC adventure game, in which Eymerich is called to investigate a complex
case that reveals a new face of Evil. The player ﬁnds and collects objects through
sound feedback of scenery elements.

246

M.C.C. Ara´ujo et al.

2.2 Mobile Audio Games

Audio Games may also be developed for mobile platforms. It is similar to any
other digital game with audio and video output. In other words, it has a narrative,
 and the player interaction uses audio and other native resources of the
mobile device. For instance, sensors and gestures may also be used to guarantee 
and improve player’s immersion. Audio games that are in a mobile context
present the same gender variety that console-based or PC games, such as adventure 
games, action, terror, running, RPG, among others [6,23].

Mobile game developers also work with binaural audio. Sound eﬀects provide
an identiﬁcation of where the player is, and device gestures can be translated
into game commands. These sound eﬀects allow them to build an immersive
world around the player, making him able to identify direction and distance from
game objects. Besides, the mobile game could take advantages of the resources
available in Smartphones and tablets as the a compass, GPS, accelerometer, and
other sensors [12,20,26].

Accessibility implementation in mobile games involves several speciﬁc issues.
Mobile devices provide freedom to the user, which can play games everywhere
using a multitude of input methods (text, gestures on the screen, gesture with
the mobile phone, etc.). However, these characteristics imply more interaction
limitations for players with disabilities.

While designing games for mobile devices, game designers and developer
must consider items related to alternative inputs (e.g., “buttons” conﬁguration,
controlling customization). Some games include a capacity of spinning the device
in space by using a gyroscope to control the game avatars. Other games require
interaction with the device’s touchscreen. In both situations, developers must
provide alternative controllers. For instance, the game should have alternative
buttons in the interface, allowing those that cannot properly hold the device to
be able to play the game by using the screen buttons [12,17]. High contrast and
design options for color-blind people are important for players with low vision or
color blindness so they can distinguish critical areas related to the game menu
and navigation.

Web repositories also contain a list of mobile audio games that are accessible
for people who are blind. Papa Sangre, Blind Legend, VBHangman, and GBraille
Asteroids are examples of these audio games. Their download is available at the
virtual stores of Android and iOs. For instance, Papa Sangre is an audio-based
navigation game with a terror thematic. Gamers walk or run by tapping left and
right on the bottom of the screen. Sliding gestures on the screen will turn the
user’s virtual “avatar”. The game plays 3D audio cues for directional guidance.
It is available for both Android and iOS. Another example is VBHangman, in
which the user plays the game and tries to determine what word is dictated,
given its length and a limited number of guesses [18].

Mobile Audio Games Accessibility Evaluation for Users Who Are Blind

247

3 Methodology

The methodology followed in this research followed four phases: Analysis of
Accessibility Guidelines, Proposal of Guidelines for Audiogames, Development
of Evaluation Instrument, and Evaluation of Audiogames. The starting point of
the work was the search and studying of papers concerning accessibility in both
digital and audio games. This study also includes the investigation of the main
accessibility guidelines for digital games. In the beginning, the goal was to ﬁnd
a guide or group of patterns, such as WCAG 2.0, that could help in the design
of mobile games for people with visual impairment. However, the ﬁrst searches
and readings indicated an inconsistency in the guidelines and recommendations,
which led to the decision of carrying this research out.

The research second stage consisted of the study, classiﬁcation, and compilation 
of the guidelines and recommendations. We focus on the accessibility
features for people who are blind. We adapted these guidelines for an evaluation
performed, focused on the most relevant accessibility characteristics provided in
mobile audiogames for people with visual impairment and blindness. Based on
this study, we identiﬁed ten recommendations that can be considered recurrent
or minimal requirements to meet in the design and development of a mobile
audiogame. We then create an evaluation instrument that allows the assessment
of these recommendations in mobile audio games. This guide was used throughout 
the whole process of design and development of an accessible audio game. In
the fourth part of the study, we applied the instrument in the evaluation of ten
mobile audiogames (e.g., Nebula, Inquisitor, GBraille Hangman). This evaluation 
was held with the assistance of two individuals who were blind. The results
and their analysis are shown in Sect. 4.

3.1 Accessibility Guidelines Investigation

In the ﬁrst phase of this research, we gathered and studied six collections of
guidelines:

– Accessibility in Games: Motivations and Approaches - IGDA (International

Game Developers Association) [14];

– Game Accessibility Guidelines Top Ten - IGDA GASIG - Game Accessibility

Special Interest Group [14];

– Guidelines for the development of entertaining software for people with multiple 
learning disabilities - UPS Project [23];

– Guidelines for the Development of Accessible Computer Games - Roland Oss-

– Blind Computer Games: guidelines for building blind-accessible computer

– A Pratical Guide to Game Acessibility (Includiﬁcation) - The AbleGames

mann [20];

games - J. Bannick [15];

Foundation [17].

These guides present - through similar structure and points of view - recommendations 
and accessibility guidelines focused speciﬁcally on the assessment

248

M.C.C. Ara´ujo et al.

and support for the development of accessible digital games. These six guidelines 
are the most cited by the game development community.

The guidelines deal with the relevance of game items that maximize the
accessibility, considering aspects concerning the user, the game theme, and the
characteristics of the interactions. For example, the IGDA Game Access SIG
(Game Accessibility Special Interest Group) proposed, in 2004, nineteen accessibility 
guidelines. The group derived the guidelines from a research of 20 accessible
games. Most games included applications for blind users, individual with a motor
disability, and games for users who are hearing impaired.

Norwegian organization Medialt has sponsored the UPS project aim at creating 
guidelines to adjust existing games to become more accessible to a larger
audience. They propose a set of 34 accessibility recommendations.

A group of developers, specialists, and scholars published two guidelines: the
Guidelines for the Development of Accessible Computer Games and Blind Computer 
Games: guidelines for building blind-accessible computer games. In both
cases, the authors gathered eﬀorts to increase the number of recommendations
available. The last guide studied, called Includiﬁcation, brings deﬁnitions and
approaches that developers must implement to promote accessibility in digital
games. They propose guidelines for the general themes of visual impairment,
cognitive disability, motor disability, and hearing impairment. English organizations 
created a Web portal3 with an illustrated version of the Includiﬁcation
guidelines.

3.2 Top 10 Recommendations

There is a variety of possible approaches that game designers and developers can
follow considering the main items in accessibility that are applicable for mobile
platforms. The set of recommendations in the guidelines studied deals with all
types of disabilities. However, our focus is game accessibility for gamers who
are blind. To do so, we made a simpliﬁcation of the recommendations having in
mind the assessment of mobile audio games. Hence, after the study of the six
guidelines, we identiﬁed the ten most relevant game accessibility characteristics
that must be provided for gamers who are blind.

These ten recommendations can be considered recurrent or minimal requirements 
to meet in the design and development of a mobile audio game. These
recommendations contains simple considerations and design decisions that apply
to most game mechanics. However, these are the recommendations that beneﬁt 
the biggest number of players and are easy to implement if they are taken
into account since the Game Design Document (GDD) creation. The following
list detail each of the ten recommendations and tests to identify their correct
application:

– R1 - Game level and speed adjustments. The game should allow players

to choose between a wide range of challenges and speeds.

3 http://gameaccessibilityguidelines.com.

Mobile Audio Games Accessibility Evaluation for Users Who Are Blind

249

Goal: People might beneﬁt from slower and easier versions to adjust the
game, adapting to their needs.

Test: Does the game allow these settings to be changed? If yes, can the title
be adjusted to a mode in which is much harder to fail or to be hit?

– R2 - Free exploration and tutorial modes. The game should oﬀer a way
in which the player can explore the game without failures. Another possibility
includes a tutorial mode that explains how to play the title.

Goal: This game feature helps in the understanding, control adjustment, skill
development and to oﬀer a fun way for those who interact with the standard
game while playing alone.

Test: Is the game free exploration mode easy to enable? Does it have attractive 
commands to catch the player´s attention? Is the player free to try and
learn on his/hers own pace?

– R3 - High contrast interfaces. The game should oﬀer high contrast color
schemes. Essential items and the menu selection must follow the same approach.
 Also, the game should allow background deactivation in 2D/3D games.

Goal: It increases the visibility of text items that are important for players
who are visual impaired.

Test: First, the tester should run the game on a low-resolution computer
screen. Is it possible to read and navigate by its menu or is it too diﬃcult? If
it is hard to navigate, the game is not following this recommendation correctly.
– R4 - Friendly design for people with color blindness. Game developers
should avoid color combinations that are hard or impossible for a person with
color blindness to distinguish.

Goal: The goal is to allow access to information in all color shapes and also
oﬀer alternative conﬁgurations to transmit the meaning of the color combination.


Test: How is the color information in the display? Are only two colors being
used to give options? Is there a color palette showing all colors in a way that
allows color-blind people to change it?

– R5 - Accessible menu. Game interface customization should be ease to
access by people who are blind. For this, the menu should have fast starting
modes, alternative texts, and navigation for the menu entry (e.g., text-tospeech 
and a description of symbols).

Goal: For a game with a complex interface, the goal is to provide a simpliﬁed
interface that shows only the most common used controls. All the resources will
continue available. However, they are hidden from the users in a ﬁrst place.

250

M.C.C. Ara´ujo et al.

Test: Do the players face diﬃculties when navigation through the menu? Is
there a way to access most of the game functions in 3 menu options or less?
– R6 - Standard presentation of texts. Game messages and labels should be
compatible with screen readers. Gamers should be able to use simple gestures
to access the majority of the text messages, which should be read by the screen
readers. When the game shows a visual message, it should be recommended
to present an equivalent audio message to indicate what has been done.
Goal: Users with visual impairment will be able to identify and understand
texts presented in the game.

Test: Use a screen reader provided by the mobile operational system or one
that is compatible with it. Are the items and descriptions read correctly by
the tool?

– R7 - Speech-generating features. This recommendation is a derivation of
R6. The main idea is to use text-to-speech technologies to improve the user
immersion. Texts can be presented in diﬀerent languages and be correctly
read by game-integrated voice synthesizers, even there is no screen reader
installed.

Goal: R7 allows users with visual impairment situate themselves in the game
dialogues and the sequence of narrative texts.

Test: Navigate through the game with a personal with no visual impairment
and an another one with visual impairment. Do the navigation of all control
combinations properly return visual and hearing feedback for both users?

– R8 - Accessibility resources easily found. Developers should implement
features that assure easy access to accessibility conﬁgurations. Gamers should
access and understand in the ﬁrst contact with the game where are the accessibility 
features (e.g., color customization, audio cues enabling, additional
audio feedback).

Goal: The goal is to permit players to know that they will be capable of
enjoying the game before purchasing the title or start playing. This information 
must be mainly in the dissemination platforms of these games on the
web, for example.

Test: Is there a way to quickly check the accessibility features, options and
requirements of the game right in the ﬁrst contact with the title?

– R9 - Game tutorials and help. Developers should hierarchize game tutorial 
and helps to guide the gamer through the help items, providing feedback.
This resource would be useful for almost all players, especially, for people with
learning disabilities that have low attention span or lack lasting attention to
focus on a long instruction guide.

Goal: Following R9, the game provides the players with objective indicators
assisting the players in situations of bewilderment.

Mobile Audio Games Accessibility Evaluation for Users Who Are Blind

251

Test: Is the player forced to read long information passages? Can he properly
continue with his game through fast orientation?

– R10 - Orientation. Players should be able to use the physical keyboard
or the touchscreen to guide the avatar in many directions and receive feedback 
about its direction. For example, using the sliding gesture to the right
the avatar will turn its face to the right in a standard angle (e.g., turn 45
degrees). An audio feedback will be played describing the users orientation
(e.g., North).

Goal: To guide speciﬁc avatar movements and receive orientation feedback.

Test: Is there a way to oﬀer the player to be guided based on the cardinal
points, for example?

4 Accessibility Assessment Instrument for Mobile Audio

Games

From the top ten recommendations, we created an assessment instrument to help
game developers in the testing of the mobile audio games. The questionnaire
comprises a total of 32 questions distributed in six categories. These categories
are inspired by WCAG 2.0, which is a W3C stable and referenceable technical
standard for accessibility assessment. The six categories are:

– [C1]-Alternative texts: The game mobile interface should provide textual
alternatives for non-textual content. The idea is to map visual elements to
speech and textual messages. This additional information should be available
as text, aiming the proper use of screen reader programs that provide a sound
return of textual information.

– [C2]-Adaptability: Game interfaces and contents should be adaptable
according to the mobile device characteristics. So, they could be presented in
many forms on the mobile devices (for example, in minor resolution or only
audio), without losing essential information.

– [C3]-Atmosphere: Navigating in the mobile interface, players should be able
to comfortably situate themselves in the scenery from the content, including
through separate sound return.

– [C4]-Operability: Interface, Interaction, and navigation components should
be operable, easy to understand, and intervene by players. Fast start options
should be included for avoiding multiple levels of information overloading
the players. Players should have appropriate times of interaction with game
features.

– [C5]-Conﬁguration Facility: the game should allow the player to adjust,
simplify, and change controls and game settings. Language issues, screen resolution,
 speech resource, screen readers, volume, among others features should
be properly addressed in this category.

252

M.C.C. Ara´ujo et al.

– [C6]-Assistance and Tutoring: Provide documentation, tutorial mode,
and help features to assist the player in the understanding of the gameplay.

All 32 questions are classiﬁed as A, AA and AAA. Level attendance suggests

eﬀort in support of game accessibility features for people who are blind.

– Level A17 
questions: The conformity level A (minimal level) comprises
satisfactory criteria that could be implemented with low or moderate technical
eﬀort. This level includes most of the part of game mechanics and interface.
– Level AA12 
questions: The conformity level AA guarantees that the game
attends a more accurate list of successful criteriums. However, the technical
eﬀort to implement these features may be high. Some mobile devices and
platforms may not support these features, which implies in an extra implementation 
eﬀort.

– Level AAA3 
questions: AAA ensures that the game contemplates satisfactory 
criteria that widen game experience. However, meeting the criteria is so
speciﬁc that recommendations apply to a limited game list. This level will not
be easily accomplished by games targeting a large audience, being suitable
for games developed focusing on a particular player proﬁle (e.g., totally blind
users).

We attribute one point for all 32 questions. But, each level (A, AA or AAA)
has a distinct weight, being 3 to level A, and 2 to level AA, and 1 to AAA.
In this sense, the assessment can attribute to level A (the most critical one) a
maximum of 51 points, level AA 24 points, and level AAA 3 points. Therefore, a
game can reach the maximum of 80 points. Then, a game is going to be evaluated
as insuﬃcient when the score is from 0 to 39 points; unsatisfactory, when is from
40 to 60 points; and good when the score is from 61 to 78 points.

The assessment instrument is available on https://goo.gl/np7PrR.

5 Mobile Audio Game Evaluations

The ﬁnal step of our study consisted of accessibility tests by using the proposed 
assessment instrument. Tests have evaluated ten audio games aiming at
better reﬁne the investigation of accessibility features found in mobile audio
games recurrently. The assessment also tried to measure the conformity level of
these applications according to the top ten game accessibility recommendations.
Tables 1 and 2 show a summary of the evaluation results.

5.1 Users

We carried out the evaluation process with the assistance of two individuals who
were visually impaired and collaborated with the research group. One user was
26 years old, and the other was 32 years old. Both users receive scholarships and
work in the IFCE research center. They assist accessibility tests of the prototypes
and software developed by the research group. They have great knowledge and
experience using touchscreen mobile devices.

Mobile Audio Games Accessibility Evaluation for Users Who Are Blind

253

5.2 Audio Games

We evaluated eight distinct games and two versions of a ninth game:

– Mine Sweeper Accessible - BFG. The aim of this freeware game4 is to
ﬁnd and mark all the hidden bombs on the game board map. The game
includes many accessibility resources and uses tactile feedback for interaction
(screen vibration). Blind Faith Games has developed this arcade game for
Android Platform 2.2 or superior versions.

– Golf Accessible - BFG. This arcade and freeware game5 works on Android
2.2 or superior versions. It provides a Golf game experience in an accessible
format. The Blind Faith Games has created a Golf game with many game
modes and levels.

– Zarodnik - BFG. The aim of this strategy game6 is to collect rewards while
defending and avoiding an attack from an ocean monster. Also developed
by Blind Faith Games, this freeware Android game uses audio eﬀects by
implementing 3D binaural sound, and it also provides tactile feedback during
the game interaction.

– GBraille HangMan v3.0 and 3.1 - GREat Lab. It´s an educational quiz
game based on the hangman game7. It runs on Android 4.0 and uses GBraille
Keyboard data entry. The game requires a previous installation of a voice synthesizer 
for its full functioning (e.g., eSpeak or Acapela). GBraille Hangman
Version 3.1 has added new game features, corrected some accessibility problems,
 and included more language options.

– Nebula. Gray Company developed this action and strategy game8 for iOS.
Nebula has an arcade style of spatial battles. It targets as players both people
with or without visual impairment. Players need to trust their hearing to move
forward and win. The game also oﬀers a multiplayer mode.

– Inquisitor Audio Game Adventure. An inquisitor, Eymerich, is called to
investigate an unclear case of heresy, which can reveal a new face of Evil. The
game is available for both Android and iOS platforms9. It can be played by
blind, myopic, visually impaired, and sighted people.

– Flarestar. The mission is to discover Icarus spaceships, ﬂy to explore
deep space, avoiding collisions, ﬁghting training drones, and trained strikers.
 Audiogame.it developed this arcade game10 for iOS 8.1.

– GBraille Asteroids v.6.0 - GREat Lab. The goal of the game11 is to
practices Braille characters by using a Braille-based virtual keyboard. In this
battle arcade game, players are in a spacecraft and have to avoid hits from

4 https://play.google.com/store/Apps/details?id=es.eucm.blindfaithgames.

minesweeepe.

5 https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=es.eucm.blindfaithgames.golfgame.
6 https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=es.eucm.blindfaithgames.zarodnik.
7 https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.gbraille.forca.
8 http://www.applevis.com/forum/ios-gaming/nebula.
9 http://www.eymerich.it/index.php?center=audiogame.
10 http://www.applevis.com/apps/ios/games/ﬂarestar.
11 https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.gbraille.asteroids.

254

M.C.C. Ara´ujo et al.

asteroids. To do so, users must destroy the asteroids by ﬁring missiles. To
trigger them, the user uses gestures on the screen that correspond to the
writing of Braille characters.

– Papa Sangre II - the museum of memories. This paid iOS app is a ﬁrst
person adventure game12. The player is in a posthumous world and the game
atmosphere makes him access memories to evolve. He has to ﬁnd a way back
to the living world. For this, the player explores a museum of memories, the
Papa Sangre’s Museum, a place where his existence depends on the knowledge
of the living world. In the museum, there is a danger of being lost forever as
a spirit without purpose or memories of his origin.

5.3 Materials

Users have played the games in two mobile devices: (i) Apple iPhone 5 S with
iOS 8.13 system, and (ii) Motorola MOTO G 2nd generation with Android 4.4.4
operational system (KitKat).

5.4 Procedures

Section 5.2 describes in detail all the games evaluated. They are available in
Web repositories, such as Audiogames.net, Grey Company, Google Play Store,
Universal Access, and Audiogame.it. We selected these games based on their
popularity. We also evaluated three games developed by our research group.

The evaluation lasted four days. Each user has tested two games per day,
and in the fourth day, they evaluate the last one. Each game evaluation section
lasted for 50 min. One assistant ﬁlled the assessment instrument according to
the answers given by each user.

5.5 Results

Tables 1 and 2 present an evaluation summary, as well as the scores obtained for
each game. Results indicate that only two from a total of ten games have a right
level of accessibility meeting the top ten recommendations. Two games were considered 
unsatisfactory and three presented insuﬃcient results mainly concerning
questions of level A, which are those indispensable in the implementation of
game accessibility features.

Test results also indicate the categories of recommendations identiﬁed as critical 
for each game. The most common errors are related to operability category
[C4]. Minor errors are related to Alternative Texts [C1]. It means that these ten
games have basic accessibility levels, but features that are more complex are not
receiving the same attention.

12 https://itunes.apple.com/br/app/papa-sangre/id407536885.

Mobile Audio Games Accessibility Evaluation for Users Who Are Blind

255

Table 1. Accessibility evaluation results - Part 1

Game

Critical Categories

Score

Evaluation

[C4] Conﬁguration presents problems 
related to memorization and
lack of agility when accessing rules,
commands, and game objectives;
[C5] Some Incompatibilities with
screen readers;

[C2]- The game has simple versions 
of menu options and interfaces,
 but it not has options for en-
abled/disabled them;
[C3]- The audio descriptions of
some commands are not executing
correctly;

BFGMine


Sweeper

Accessible

Golf

Level A: 12 pts (x3)
Level AA: 7 pts (x2)
Level AAA: 2 pts (x1)
Final Score: 52 pts

Unsatisfactory

Level A: 8 pts (x3)
Level AA: 6 pts (x2)
Level AAA: 1 pt (x1)
Final Score: 37 pts

Insufﬁcient

[C4] Time to read, understand, and
use content is insufﬁcient [C4] In
order to start a new game, user must
navigatethrough 
multiple levels of
screens and menus

Level A: 8 pts (x3)
Level AA 6 pts (x2)
Level AAA: 2 pts (x1)
Final score: 38 pts

Insufﬁcient

Zarodinik BFG

[C3] Sound feedback is not enough
to indicate all essential information
for the understanding of the game
scenes. Audio descriptions are not
sufﬁcient to orient the navigation in
menus and input/output screens;
[C6] The game does not have a tutorial 
mode.

Gbraille Hangman 3.1 improved
some interaction problems (e.g.,
navigation, menu, audio feedback,
speed) of the 3.0 version, but the
game is still not meeting [C4] and
[C6] adequately.

GBraille
HangMan

v.3.0

GBraille

HangMan v.3.1

Level A: 8 pts (x3)
Level AA: 6 pts (x2)
Level AAA: 1 pts (x1)
Final Score: 37pts

Insufﬁcient

Level A: 11 pts (x3)
Level AA: 6 pts (x2)
Level AAA: 1 pts (x1)
Final Score: 46 pts.

Unsatisfactory

256

M.C.C. Ara´ujo et al.

Table 2. Accessibility evaluation results - Part 2

Game

Critical Categories

Score

Evaluation

[C2] Low vision players need options
that widen the size or the contrast of elements;

[C4] The game has some problems with
screen readers settings. It does not warn
users whether the screen reader is disabled 
or enabled;

Level A: 15 pts (x3)
Level AA: 10 pts (x2)
Level AAA: 2 pts (x1)
Final Score: 67 pts.

Good

[C3] Sound feedback is not enough to
indicate all essential information during
game sessions;
[C6] The game does not have a tutorial
mode.

Level A: 14 pts (x3)
Level AA: 6 pts (x2)
Level AAA: 1 pts (x1)
Final score: 56 pts

Unsatisfactory

[C2] Low vision players need options
that widen the size or the contrast of elements;


Level A: 14 pts (x3)
Level AA: 9 pts (x2)
Level AAA: 2 pts (x1)
Final Score: 62 pts

Good

[C5] Incompatibilities and conﬁguration 
problems with screen readers;
[C1] Many alternative texts are absent;

Level A: 13 pts (x3)
Level AA: 8 pts (x2)
Level AAA: 2 pts (x1)
Final Score: 57 pts

Unsatisfactory

Nebula

GBraille
Asteroids

Inquisitor

Flarestar

Papa Sangre

II

[C5] Incompatibilities and conﬁguration 
problems with screen readers;
[C1] Some alternative texts are absent;

Level A: 16 pts (x3)
Level AA: 12 pts (x2)
Level AAA: 2 pts (x1)
Final Score: 74 pts

Good

6 Final Considerations

The focus of this paper was a preliminary proposal of structuration and organization 
of the main guidelines of accessibility for audio games in mobile platforms.
As the ﬁrst contribution, the research produced a simpliﬁed list of ten accessibility 
recommendations focused on gamers who are blind. Second, we oﬀer a
WCGA-style manual test instrument to assess these recommendations in mobile
audio games.

We implemented an initial evaluation with ten mobile audio games. The
results suggest a low level of accessibility in a part of the mobile audio games
investigated. From this research, we noted how complex is to trace proﬁles or
evaluation patterns for accessible games in the mobile context because of the
mobile device heterogeneity. For this study, we did not take into account the
many device screen sizes, the standard gestures on the touchscreen, and also the

Mobile Audio Games Accessibility Evaluation for Users Who Are Blind

257

use of device sensors in the games. Recommendations to deal with these issues
should be further investigated.

The tested samples of this work are not suﬃcient to obtain more precise
information about the mobile gaming scenery. Due to this factor, we consider this
as an initial study on the identiﬁcation of necessary reﬁnements for the group of
proposed guidelines and recommendations. However, the study provides evidence
that the instruments and compiled recommendations are a good starting point
for game designers and developers seeking a way to make their games more
accessible in mobile platforms.

Acknowledgments. This paper is a partial result of the project GBraille supported
by CNPq (MCT/CNPq 14/2013 - Universal) under grant number 484255/2013-4. It was
also partially funded by the Program of Scientiﬁc Cooperation called STIC-AmSudCAPES 
program/CONICYT/MAE. The sponsored project is entitled Knowing and
Interacting while Gaming for the Blind (KIGB), 2014.

The research was also funded by the Fondo Nacional de Desarrollo Cient´ıﬁco y
Tecnol´ogico (FONDECYT), Fondecyt 1150898; and the Basal Funds for Centers of
Excellence, FB0003 project, from the Associative Research Program of CONICYT.
Mobile applications have been developed with the support of MCTI-SECIS/CNPq No.
84/2013 - Assistive Technology project, registered under grant number 458825/2013-1.

References

1. Visual impairment and blindness fact sheets. World Health Organization (2014).

http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs282/en/. Accessed Sep 2015

2. Antona, M., Stephanidis, C. (eds.): UAHCI 2015. LNCS, vol. 9177. Springer, Cham

(2015). doi:10.1007/978-3-319-20684-4

3. Archambault, D., Ossmann, R., Gaudy, T., Miesenberger, K.: Computer games

and visually impaired people. Upgrade 8(2), 43–53 (2007)

4. Atkinson, M.T., Gucukoglu, S., Machin, C.H., Lawrence, A.E.: Making the mainstream 
accessible: redeﬁning the game. In: Proceedings of the 2006 ACM SIGGRAPH 
Symposium on Videogames, pp. 21–28. ACM (2006)

5. Atkinson, M.T., Gucukoglu, S., Machin, C.H.C., Lawrence, A.E.: Making the mainstream 
accessible: what’s in a game? In: Miesenberger, K., Klaus, J., Zagler, W.L.,
Karshmer, A.I. (eds.) ICCHP 2006. LNCS, vol. 4061, pp. 380–387. Springer, Heidelberg 
(2006). doi:10.1007/11788713 57

6. Attewell, J.: Mobile technologies and learning. London: Learning and Skills Development 
Agency 2(4) (2005)

7. Beksa, J., Fizek, S., Carter, P.: Audio Games: Investigation of the Potential
Through Prototype Development. In: Biswas, P., Duarte, C., Langdon, P., Almeida,
L. (eds.) A Multimodal End-2-End Approach to Accessible Computing. HIS, pp.
211–224. Springer, London (2015). doi:10.1007/978-1-4471-6708-2 11

8. da Ara´ujo, M.C.C., Silva, A.R.S., Darin, T.G.R., de Castro, E.L., Andrade,
R.M.C., de Lima, E.T., S´anchez, J., de Castro Filho, J.A., Viana, W.: Design
and usability of a braille-based mobile audiogame environment. In: Ossowski [21],
pp. 232–238. http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2851613.2851701

9. Cheiran, J.F.P.: Jogos inclusivos: diretrizes de acessibilidade para jogos digitais

(2007). http://www.lume.ufrgs.br/handle/10183/77230

258

M.C.C. Ara´ujo et al.

10. Cheiran, J.F.P., Nedel, L., Pimenta, M.S.: Inclusive games: a multimodal experience 
for blind players. In: Proceedings of the 2011 Brazilian Symposium on Games
and Digital Entertainment, SBGAMES 2011, pp. 164–172. IEEE Computer Society,
 Washington, DC (2011). http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/SBGAMES.2011.24

11. Cheiran, J.F.P., Pimenta, M.S.: “eu tambem quero jogar!”: Reavaliando as praticas 
e diretrizes de acessibilidade em jogos. In: Proceedings of the 10th Brazilian
Symposium on on Human Factors in Computing Systems and the 5th Latin American 
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction, IHC+CLIHC 2011, pp. 289–
297. Brazilian Computer Society, Porto Alegre, Brazil (2011). http://dl.acm.org/
citation.cfm?id=2254436.2254485

12. Csap´o, ´A., Wers´enyi, G., Nagy, H., Stockman, T.: A survey of assistive technologies
and applications for blind users on mobile platforms: a review and foundation for
research. J. Multimodal User Interfaces 9(4), 275–286 (2015). http://dx.doi.org/
10.1007/s12193-015-0182-7

13. Grabski, A., Toni, T., Zigrand, T., Weller, R., Zachmann, G.: Kinaptic - techniques
and insights for creating competitive accessible 3d games for sighted and visually
impaired users. In: 2016 IEEE Haptics Symposium (HAPTICS), pp. 325–331, April
2016

14. IGDA, I.G.D.A.: Accessibility in Games: Motivations and Approaches (2004).

http://archives.igda.org/accessibility/IGDA Accessibility WhitePaper.pdf

15. J. Blind, B.: Computer Games: guidelines for building blind-accessible computer

games (2012). http://www.blindcomputergames.com/guidelines/guidelines.html

16. de Lima, L.S.: A produ¸c˜ao de subjetividade nos jogos eletrˆonicos. Ph.D. thesis,

Pontif´ıcia Universidade Cat´olica de S˜ao Paulo (2011)

17. Mark, C.B., Spohn, S.D.: A pratical guide to game acessibility (2012). http://www.

includiﬁcation.com/AbleGamers Includiﬁcation.pdf

18. Milne, L.R., Bennett, C.L., Ladner, R.E.: Vbghost: a braille-based educational
smartphone game for children. In: Proceedings of the 15th International ACM
SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility, ASSETS 2013, pp. 75:1–
75:2. ACM, New York (2013). http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2513383.2513396

19. Morelli, T., Foley, J., Folmer, E.: Vi-bowling: a tactile spatial exergame for individuals 
with visual impairments. In: Proceedings of the 12th International ACM
SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility, ASSETS 2010, pp. 179–
186. ACM, New York (2010). http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1878803.1878836

20. Ossmann, R., Miesenberger, K.: Guidelines for the development of accessible computer 
games. In: Miesenberger, K., Klaus, J., Zagler, W.L., Karshmer, A.I. (eds.)
ICCHP 2006. LNCS, vol. 4061, pp. 403–406. Springer, Heidelberg (2006). doi:10.
1007/11788713 60

21. Ossowski, S. (ed.): Proceedings of the 31st Annual ACM Symposium on Applied
Computing, Pisa, Italy, 4–8 April 2016. ACM (2016). http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/
2851613

22. Pereira, J.C., Rodrigues, M.E., Campos, H.O., Amorim, P.R.d.S.: Exergames como
alternativa para o aumento do dispˆendio energ´etico: uma revis˜ao sistem´atica.
Revista Brasileira de Atividade F´ısica & Sa´ude 17(5), 332–340 (2013)

23. Project, U.: Guidelines for the development of entertaining software for people 
with multiple learning disabilities (2012). http://www.medialt.no/rapport/
entertainment guidelines

24. Reid, L.G., Snow-Weaver, A.: Wcag 2.0: a web accessibility standard for the evolving 
web. In: Proceedings of the 2008 International Cross-disciplinary Conference
on Web Accessibility (W4A), pp. 109–115. ACM (2008)

Mobile Audio Games Accessibility Evaluation for Users Who Are Blind

259

25. Rutter, R., Lauke, P.H., Waddell, C., Thatcher, J., Henry, S.L., Lawson, B., Kirkpatrick,
 A., Heilmann, C., Burks, M.R., Regan, B., et al.: Web Accessibility: Web
Standards and Regulatory Compliance. Apress, Berkeley (2006)

26. S´anchez, J., Darin, T.G.R., Andrade, R.M.C.: Multimodal videogames for the cognition 
of people who are blind: trends and issues. In: Antona, M., Stephanidis [2],
pp. 535–546. Springer (2015). http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-20684-4 52

27. S´anchez, J., Flores, H.: Audiomath: Blind children learning mathematics through

audio. Int. J. Disabil. Human Dev. 4(4), 311–316 (2005)

28. S´anchez, J., Mascar´o, J.: Audiopolis, navigation through a virtual city using audio
and haptic interfaces for people who are blind. In: Stephanidis, C. (ed.) UAHCI
2011. LNCS, vol. 6766, pp. 362–371. Springer, Heidelberg (2011). doi:10.1007/
978-3-642-21663-3 39

29. SixToStart: Zombies, Run! (2015). https://www.zombiesrungame.com/
30. Wake, J.D.: Mobile, location-based games for learning: Developing, deploying and
evaluating mobile game technology in education. The University of Bergen (2013)
31. Yuan, B.: Towards Generalized Accessibility of Video Games for the Visually

Impaired. Ph.D. thesis, University of Nevada, Reno, NV, USA (2009)

32. Yuan, B., Folmer, E., Harris, Jr., F.C.: Game accessibility: a survey. Univers. Access

Inf. Soc. 10(1), 81–100 (2011). http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10209-010-0189-5

33. Yuan, B., Folmer, E., Harris Jr., F.C.: Game accessibility: a survey. Univ. Access

Inf. Soc. 10(1), 81–100 (2011). http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10209-010-0189-5

