Audio Description of Videos

for People with Visual Disabilities

Agebson Rocha Façanha1(&), Adonias Caetano de Oliveira1,

Marcos Vinicius de Andrade Lima2,
Windson Viana2, and Jaime Sánchez3

1 Federal Institute of Education,

Science and Technology of Ceará (IFCE), Fortaleza, CE, Brazil
{acessibilidadevirtual,agebson}@ifce.edu.br

2 Federal University of Ceará (UFC), Fortaleza, CE, Brazil

adonias.ifce@gmail.com, marcos.engsoft@gmail.com,

windson@virtual.ufc.br

3 Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile

jsanchez@dcc.uchile.cl

Abstract. Audio description can be deﬁned as an activity of linguistic mediation 
that transforms visual to verbal, allowing for a better comprehension of
scenes when there is no dialog between personages. In this paper, we present the
conception, development, and an initial usability evaluation of a software suite
for audio description. The proposal pursues to facilitate and widen a comprehension 
of videos for people with visual disabilities by using synthesized voice.
We developed a video player– ADVPlayer – that synchronizes the original
video with a second audio containing a TTS version of an audio description
script. We evaluated the usability of ADVPlayer with students with visual
impairment in two South American countries. This evaluation revealed a high
comprehension and acceptance in terms of satisfaction and conﬁdence.

Keywords: Accessibility  Digital video  Audio description

1 Introduction

Modern society experiences a time of intensive access to digital media. Entertainment,
education, work, in short, almost all daily activities of the modern citizen are inﬂuenced
by digital media. One of the most successful media is digital video, which is broadcasted 
on digital TV, shared on social websites (e.g., Vimeo), or distributed on physical
media as DVD and Blu-Ray.

Most digital videos, however, are inaccessible to people with visual impairment.
According to the World Health Organization, 285 million people with visual disabilities 
are estimated in the whole world. 40 million of them are totally blind. The majority
(90 %) live in developing countries, such as, Brazil and India [5]. These people face
daily difﬁculties. Nowadays, they also have to deal with a socio-cultural exclusion from
the digital world, since they do not have guarantees of access to visual content. The

© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
M. Antona and C. Stephanidis (Eds.): UAHCI 2016, Part III, LNCS 9739, pp. 505–515, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-40238-3_48

506

A. Rocha Façanha et al.

majority part of the productions released in digital media (e.g., ﬁlms, TV series, and
popular Youtube videos) does not have accessibility features.

An attempt to reduce this exclusion recommends the addition of a narration of the
scenes. This technique is known as audio description, and it adds a second audio to the
original one. Audio description can be deﬁned as an activity of linguistic mediation, a
mode of inter-semiotic translation that transforms visual to verbal, allowing for a
comprehension of scenes when there is no dialog between personages. The idea is to
add descriptions of the video visual elements, which are essential for understanding the
dialogues and scenes that contain a strong visual character [6]. However, many videos
do not have this accessibility feature, due to the economic costs of the audio description
production.

Some initiatives exist to provide audio description of ﬁlms and digital television
shows. In many cases, the audio descriptions are made grace to accessibility laws (e.g.,
Brazil federal law nº 5.296). However, these initiatives contemplate a small portion of
digital videos. This problem is even greater if we analyze the digital videos available on
the Web (e.g., news websites, video sharing platforms like Youtube and Vimeo).

For a task of this magnitude, a possible approach is to rely on the help of virtual
communities, and use systems that assist the process of creating and playing audio
description. Sites for collaborative creation of movie subtitles illustrate the potential of
the approach. The Opensubtitles.org site is one such example. However, the quality of
the audio descriptions should not be compromised in this process.

In recent years, the synthesized voice technologies showed strong growth in performance 
and effectiveness. They provide the “transformation” of a text into “human”
voices. Text-To-Speech (TTS) software is a key component in the functioning of
accessibility technologies targeting users with visual impairment, such as: screen
readers [2], software to aid Web navigation [2], virtual keyboards [3], and, accessible
digital games [1, 4].

In this context, our research goal is to explore the voice synthesized technologies in
order to maximize and accelerate the production of audio descriptions. With this
approach, we believe it will increase the number of accessible digital videos to the
visually impaired.

In this paper, we present the conception, development and initial usability evaluation 
of a software suite for audio description. We developed a video player–
ADVPlayer – that synchronizes the video with a description script (textual ﬁle similar
to SRT, which contains metadata such as: description time, conﬁguration of the synthesized 
voice, and scene description). In fact, ADVPlayer executes a second audio
generated from a TTS, which is a speech version of a description script. This is a more
ﬂexible and low cost approach comparing with the conventional audio description
production process (i.e., with human voice recording).

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Sect. 2 presents related work
on audio description. The ADVPlayer suite, and its design, and development processes
are described in Sect. 3. Section 4 presents the usability evaluation implemented with
students with visual impairment from two South American countries. Finally, we
conclude the paper with ﬁnal considerations and future work in Sect. 5.

Audio Description of Videos for People with Visual Disabilities

507

2 Related Work

Research on the development of assistive technologies for digital video is relatively
recent. They propose to minimize the task effort of audio description [8–10]. For
instance, researchers of the work [8] recommend the use of a tool to support the audio
descriptors’ work: the Subtitle Workshop software. This tool is focused on producing
video subtitles. Subtitle Workshop uses the SRT (Subrip subtitle format) for storing the
audio description information. The researchers’ goal was to speed up the process of
traditional audio description by using their tool. However,
the approach is still
requiring a human audio description recording.

Researches of Kobayashi et al. focus on removing the audio description recording
phase [6]. The authors analyzed the acceptability of speech synthesizers for this task.
Analyses were performed with audio in English and Japanese. They conducted a major
study of 115 participants with visual impairment during an exhibition of assistive
technologies in Japan. The aim was to compare the quality of human audio description
with the quality of synthesized audio description. Despite the superiority of human
narration, most participants admitted that their quality of life could be enhanced with
synthesized narrations. Good digital tools following this approach could increase the
number of online video with audio description.

Our research follows some of the Kobayashi’s ﬁndings. We propose a set of tools

that assist the production, sharing, and execution of synthesized audio description.

3 Synthesized Audio Description

We propose tools to support a Synthesized Audio Description approach. Our research
provides audio description with a lower cost because it does not require studio
recording of the audio description voices. The approach relies on speech synthesis of
what should be narrated. The main objective is to facilitate understanding when no
audio dialogues exist between characters, similar to what happens in traditional audio
description. The key component of this proposal is a video player that executes a
second audio by using a TTS synthesizer. ADVPlayer supports AVI video ﬁles (Audio
Video Interleave), which originally does not have accessibility features. ADVPlayer
synchronizes the original digital video with speech synthesis of a text ﬁle. This ﬁle
contains the audio description and their execution times.

Figure 1 shows the main components of ADVPlayer and its execution process. The
system input is composed of two ﬁles: a text ﬁle with audio descriptions (.adv), which
follows the standard used by movie subtitle ﬁles (SRT), and the original video ﬁle.
ADVPlayer has three main modules: (i) a digital media player, to read and reproduce
the original video; (ii) a synchronizer to read the descriptions and to invoke the speech
synthesizer, which will turn them into voice, and (iii) the TTS software itself.

According to Zuffo and Pistori [7], the speech synthesis is the generation of sound
signals that reproduce the equivalent words in a given natural language. Synthesize
voice applications are designed to imitate human speech. In the case of ADVPlayer, we
used the eSpeak TTS for this task.

508

A. Rocha Façanha et al.

Fig. 1. ADVPlayer components

3.1 Audio Description Text File (.ADV)

The description ﬁle (.adv) contains the descriptions that provide a good video understanding 
by people with visual impairment. During a video execution, ADVPlayer
reads (.adv)
following a
pre-established synchronism time. The text is converted into synthesized speech, and,
then, synchronized with the video.

text and passes it as parameter

to the eSpeak TTS,

The ADV format is similar to Subrip Subtitles format (SRT)1. The SRT has four
parts: (i) the subtitle number; (ii) the time that the subtitle appears on the screen (in hour:
minute: second: millisecond format), and the time it will disappear; (iii) the subtitle text;
and ﬁnally (iv) one blank line, which has the purpose of separating subtitles.

We extended the SRT format in order to support synthesized audio description. We
added a new line, which contains two parameters: the synthesized speech rate and the
volume of the synthesized voice (line N of Fig. 2). The speech rate parameter indicates

Fig. 2. ADV ﬁle example

1 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SubRip.

Audio Description of Videos for People with Visual Disabilities

509

the execution speed of the audio description. Its acceleration can avoid overlapping of
dialogues. This feature also acts to accelerate longer descriptions in shorter periods of
time, without, however, losing the audio description understanding (very useful in
audio description of action movies).

People with visual impairment are habituated to listening to the synthesized voice at
fast speeds. The volume parameter allows for overlapping the environment sound of
the original video. Thus, the synthesized audio description can be better understood.
Figure 2 shows an excerpt from an ADV ﬁle containing an audio description example.
W3C proposes TTML2 as standard to represent timed text on the Web. However,
we chose to extend SRT, since there is on the Internet a large community of people
who produce subtitles of movies, series, and other videos. All these virtual communities 
are familiar with the SRT format. Our hypothesis is that it will be easier for them
to collaborate in the creation of synthesized audio descriptions.

The use of ﬁles “.adv” makes possible a constant improvement in the quality of
audio descriptions. Changes can be made only by modifying the content of “.adv” ﬁles
(descriptions, synchronization time, and/or volume). This is quite different from the
recorded audio description. Upon completion of the audio description and the video
distribution, one cannot update the descriptions without dealing with a substantial
ﬁnancial impact.

(a) ADV Editor screenshot; (b) ADVPlayer playing Rocky movie; (c) a blind user testing

Fig. 3.
our approach

2 http://www.w3.org/TR/ttaf1-dfxp/.

510

A. Rocha Façanha et al.

3.2 ADVEditor and ADVPlayer

The “.adv” ﬁles can be written with any text editor (e.g., Windows Notepad).
Nonetheless, we created a tool, named ADVEditor for assisting this editing process.
This application allows for inserting textual descriptions and the speciﬁcation of the
speed, volume, and tone of the synthesized voice. The tool includes a video player to
facilitate the visualization, testing, and edition of the order of the descriptions inserted.
Figure 3 shows a ADVEditor screenshot. The tool was developed using Java SE.
The Standard Widget Toolkit (SWT) was used to implement graphic elements accessible 
to screen readers. We also used the DirectShow Java (DSJ) API for media
reproduction.

Descriptions should always be positioned in times when there is no dialogue
between the characters, giving a better understanding of the video by the visually
impaired. ADVEditor assists in this process by providing the audio description editor
test and simulation features.

Once created the “.adv” ﬁle, the user can open the ADVplayer program and provides 
information on the video he wants to run in sync with the audio description. The
ADVPlayer tool synchronizes the video execution with reading the descriptions. In
addition, it uses the user’s preferences speciﬁcations to change the type and volume of
the synthesized voice. The ADVPlayer tool was developed using the same ADVEditor
technologies.

Figure 3 also shows the ADVPlayer software running. After the ADVPlayer program 
is opened, the user must: (1) load the description ﬁle (.adv); (2) point out the
media that contains the video to be played; and (3) select the play button to start
playing. The synthesized audio description system will be enabled automatically once
the ADVplayer program is loaded.

ADVplayer is a free software and requires for its operation the Windows platform
(Windows XP or above). It has its current version in beta testing and is used by a small
group of people with visual impairment. The tool can be downloaded at: http://advacessibilidade.
rhcloud.com.

Improving the Quality of Audio Description

3.3
We have created a web page3 to promote communities of audio description editors. The
goal is to ensure the maintenance of quality of descriptions, and increase the available
number of ﬁlms and videos (e.g., translations into other languages).

On the website, people can share new descriptions, propose improvements, and
qualify the descriptions already available (through a ranking system). Our website
follows the W3C accessibility guidelines.

In this way, we hope that in a short time the number of available titles will grow
rapidly through the power of virtual communities. This behavior is already happening
in web sites that provide video subtitles (movies, series and other videos).

3 http://adv.ifce.edu.br/.

Audio Description of Videos for People with Visual Disabilities

511

4 Usability Evaluation

We performed an initial usability testing to determine the technology acceptance and
get new ideas and suggestions for improvements of the ADV Player prototype. We use
a 3 min video of the ﬁlm Monsters, Inc. to acclimate users. Then, we used focal group
techniques4 to discover, analyze, and validate it by observing users. We perform sessions 
with eight people with visual disabilities, which had distinct levels of understanding 
of the topic addressed. This initial evaluation revealed a high comprehension
and acceptance in terms of satisfaction and conﬁdence with synthetized audio
description.

The ADVEditor prototype was introduced to three audio description specialists
using the brainstorming techniques to know how they make the description and their
interests in producing descriptions using the application. Diverse suggestions to
improve the tools were highlighted. We corrected some aspects of our applications and
made its internationalization for Portuguese, English and Spanish.

After taking into account these aspects, we implemented an assessment usability
test of ADVPlayer. Tests were made with 19 students with visual disabilities in two
South American countries (Brazil and Chile). The tests seek to measure the effectiveness 
of the ADVPlayer implementation and also to quantify the acceptance of
synthesized audio description.

4.1

Sample

The sample was composed by 19 students with visual impairment. The sample was
non-probabilistic, selected for convenience. They were students of three specialized
institutions on people with visual disabilities: Escuela de Ciegos Santa Lucia, the
Col-lege Hellen Keller and the Blind Association of Ceará). The ﬁrst school is Chilean
and others are Brazilian schools.

The sample has:

– 8 men and 11 women
– Age from 6 to 47 years old
– 4 were totally blind e 15 had low vision

12 users had prior knowledge of what was an audio description, although, only
seven users have watched a video with this feature. Six of the users reported watching
movies with audio only. 4 of them were completely blind and 2 had low vision (with
serious vision impairment). Other users have reported watching videos with both image
and audio features.

Regarding the use of TTS, 9 of them did not use screen readers, eight use the JAWS

screen reader, and two of them prefer the NVDA reader, always with male voices.

4 Focal group methodology is a sampling process that seeks to obtain qualitative information given the

perceptions reported by participants during discussion meetings.

512

A. Rocha Façanha et al.

4.2 Materials

We decided to use slices of 15 min from the beginning of ﬁlms to evaluate the
ADVPlayer. The goal was to reduce the time of the test sections. We created .ADV
ﬁles of three ﬁlms: “The Book Thief”, “The Fault in Our Stars”, and “Inside Out”. All
descriptions have been prepared by people with training in scripts for audio description,
supervised by a consultant with visual impairment. Figure 4 shows the group of
descriptors using the ADVEditor. The complete audio descriptions of the movies are
now available at the project Web site.

Fig. 4. Audio descriptors are writing and reviewing (.adv) ﬁles on ADVEditor

4.3

Instruments

In all sessions, we administered a questionnaire with four parts. The ﬁrst one has a
pre-collection questionnaire with personal information to draw a proﬁle of the target
users studied (results are summarized in Sect. 4.1). The other parts are related to
pos-collection, usability feedback, and movie comprehension.

The questionnaire was developed and implemented in order to discover, analyze
and validate, from observations of the user group, requirements for the improvement
and implementation of ADVPlayer software. The pre-collection allows for knowing
each user’s proﬁle. The post-collection measures the impact of using audio description
with the synthesized speech.

Usability part of the questionnaire was designed following the works [11, 12]. The

questionnaire was created guided by the following metrics:

P1 - The audio descriptions are clear and objective, avoided me an erroneous
interpretation of the scene. (CONFIDENCE)
P2 - The amount of information transmitted during the silence interval is appropriate.
 (SATISFACTION)
P3 - The audio volume of the audio descriptions are appropriate to each situation.
(SATISFACTION)
P4 - The audio tone is appropriate for each situation. (SATISFACTION)
P5 - The type of TTS and the speed rate of the synthesized voice are appropriated to
the original movie audio.
P6 - The audio description allows imagining the movie scenes. (RELEVANCE)

Audio Description of Videos for People with Visual Disabilities

513

P7 - Watch the movie with synthesized audio description convinced me to watch
other movies with this feature. (MOTIVATION)
P8 - I feel more pleasured watching the video as a result of the audio descriptions.
P9 - I can understand information that was previously only visual. (CONFIDENCE)

To measure the degree of agreement, we used a Likert scale, ranging from 1

(completely disagree) to 5 (completely agree).

The last part of the questionnaire asks about users’ understanding on the movie. It
contains questions about the environment of the scenes, the time when the story happened,
 what and who were the characters, and the identiﬁcation of the clothes they wore.

4.4 Procedure

The tests were implemented according to the following methodology:

(1) Each session has 4–6 students, who were informed about the purpose of the

synthesized audio description, and how ADVPlayer works;

(2) They chose one of the three ﬁlms for the group session;
(3) Next, the group watched a stretch of about 15 min of the ﬁlm;
(4) At the end, we applied to each of them a questionnaire to get their opinion,

usability feedback, and understanding of the ﬁlm.

The main purpose of this structure was to obtain qualitative results of validation and
acceptance. The perceptions reported by participants during the sessions can lead us to
a better implementation of the tool in the school environment. Additionally, this
structure allows for elucidating new requirements of the proposed software. Figure 5
illustrates one of the sections.

Fig. 5. Two photos illustrating the usability section implemented in Chile

4.5 Results

From the observations and reports obtained from participants in the experiment, we
realized that there is a high satisfaction and conﬁdence in the use of audio description
technology with voice synthesis. We can highlight as relevant points of the questionnaires 
results:

514

A. Rocha Façanha et al.

1. 94.7 % of users understood the audio description for the section ﬁlm (P1 and P2)
and, more speciﬁcally, they were able to understand information that was previously 
only visual (P9).

2. The audio volume (P3) and the type of TTS (P5) were points of disagreement
among some users (10.5 % and 31.5 %, respectively). This indicates the need for
greater ﬂexibility in movie playback. We are already working to add voice choice
and speed in ADVPlayer.

3. The use of the synthesized audio description stimulated the creativity of users (P6)
and the search for other videos with audio description (P7); which is a technology
acceptance indicator.

4. We realized that the lack of experience of some users with TTS technology had an
impact on the assessment of the speed of the voice. 73.68 % of users reported the
voice speed was normal, but, 26.3 % of them considered it too fast.

5 Discussion and Conclusion

Studies on synthesized audio-description are still incipient, especially, research on
romance languages (e.g., Portuguese, Spanish). However, it is patent this approach is a
good alternative to make accessible a lot of visual productions, such as ﬁlms, series,
documentaries, concerts, for people with visual impairment.

The main features of our proposal are: (i) we provide a collaborative creation of the
audio-descriptions, since it is based on virtual communities; (ii) the approach allows a
constant improvement in the quality of available descriptions; (iii) ADVPlayer uses
various types of synthesized voices; and, ﬁnally, (iv) we allow users to customize the
running speed of the audio description.

Initial usability results of our approach indicate that most users comprehended the
information described during the video, they could understand information that before
was only visual. The voice speed and the audio volume were aspects of disagreements
of users indicating a need for a higher ﬂexibility of these functionalities in the video
executions. Also, the use of audio description with synthesized voice stimulated the
creativity of diverse users and the search for other videos with audio description
evidencing the technology acceptance.

The research is in progress now considering port ADV Player to mobile platforms,
such as Android and iOS. As future work, we also plan to make ADVPlayer Web
versions. Regarding ADVEditor, we are planning to build a recommendation feature
able to detect, through video content processing, silence moments adequate to insert
audio descriptions.

Furthermore, a collaborative web site to share description ﬁles is being developed.
It allows for sharing diverse ﬁlms, making them fast accessible. The approach opens
more options to this population to access to digital media, which contributes to their
cultural, social and school inclusion. Finally, we believe that research on synthesized
audio description may expand its potential for other populations, such as people with
intellectual disabilities, elderly, and dyslexics.

Audio Description of Videos for People with Visual Disabilities

515

Acknowledgments. This paper was partially funded by the Program of Scientiﬁc Cooperation
called STIC-AmSud-CAPES program/CONICYT/MAE. The sponsored project
is entitled
Knowing and Interacting while Gaming for the Blind (KIGB), 2014. The research was also
funded by the Fondo Nacional de Desarrollo Cientíﬁco y Tecnológico (FONDECYT), Fondecyt
1150898; and the Basal Funds for Centers of Excellence, FB0003 project, from the Associative
Research Program of CONICYT.

The desktop and Web applications have been developed with the

support of
MCTI-SECIS/CNPq No. 84/2013 - Assistive Technology project, registered under grant number
458825/2013-1.

References

1. Garcia, F.E., de Almeida Neris, V.P.: Design guidelines for audio games. In: Kurosu, M.
(ed.) HCII/HCI 2013, Part II. LNCS, vol. 8005, pp. 229–238. Springer, Heidelberg (2013)
2. Hakobyan, L., Lumsden, J., O’Sullivan, D., Bartlett, H.: Mobile assistive technologies for

the visually impaired. Surv. Ophthalmol. 58(6), 513–528 (2013). ISSN:0039-6257

3. Façanha, A.R.; Araújo, M.D.C., Viana, W., Pequeno, M.C.: LêbrailleTWT. In: The 18th
Brazilian Symposium on Multimedia and the Web (2012). São Paulo/SP. Proceedings of the
18th Brazilian Symposium on Multimedia and the Web - WebMedia 2012, vol. 1, pp. 313–
320. ACM Press, New York (2012)

4. Milne, L.R., Bennett, C.L., Ladner, R.E.: VBGhost: a braille-based educational smartphone
game for children. In: Proceedings of the 15th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference
on Computers and Accessibility (ASSETS 2013). ACM, New York (2013)

5. WHO. World Health Organization. Universal eye health: a global action plan 2014–2019.
Disponível em: http://www.who.int/blindness/AP2014_19_English.pdf. Acesso em: 26 Nov
2015

6. Kobayashi, M., O’Connell, T., Gould, B., Takagi, H., Asakawa, C.: Are synthesized video
descriptions acceptable? In: Proceedings of the 12th International ACM SIGACCESS
Conference on Computers and Accessibility (ASSETS 2010), pp. 163–170. ACM, New York
(2010)

7. Zuffo, F., Pistori, H.: Tecnologia Adaptativa e Síntese de Voz: Primeiros Experimentos.

Anais do V Workshop de Software Livre - WSL. Porto Alegre, 2–5 de Junho 2004

8. Magalhães, C.M., Araújo, V.L.S.: Metodologia para elaboração de audiodescrições de
museus baseada na semiótica social e na multimodalidade. Revista Latinoamericana de
Estudiosdel Discurso 12, 31–56 (2012)

9. Gagnon, L., Foucher, S., Heritier, M., Lalonde, M., Byrns, D., Chapdelaine, C., Turner, J.,
Mathieu, S., Laurendeau, D., Tan Nguyen, N., Ouellet, D.: Towards computer-vision
software tools to increase production and accessibility of video description for people with
vision loss. Univers. Access Inf. Soc. 8(3), 199–218 (2009)

10. Campos, V.P., Araujo, T.M.U., Souza Filho, G.L.: CineAD: Um Sistema de Geração
Automática de Roteiros de Audiodescrição. In: Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas Multimídia
e Web (WebMedia), 2014, João Pessoa. WebMedia (2014)

11. Sánchez, J.: Software Usability for Blind Children Questionnaire (SUBC). Usability

evaluation test, University of Chile (2003)

12. Sánchez, J.: End-user and facilitator questionnaire for Software Usability. Usability

evaluation test. University of Chile (2003)

