Video Gaming for Blind Learners School Integration in 

Science Classes 

Jaime Sánchez and Mauricio Sáenz 

Department of Computer Science, Center for Advanced Research in Education (CARE) 

University of Chile 

{jsanchez,msaenz}@dcc.uchile.cl 

Abstract. In this study we evaluate how the use of audio-based technology can 
facilitate  school  integration  of  blind  learners  through  the  interaction  with  a 
science  videogame.  This  experience  consisted  of  designing  and  implementing 
The Natomy’s Journey Game to be played by blind and sighted middle school 
students. The use of the videogame and its impact on the integration of blind 
learners into mainstream schools was also evaluated, through the participation 
of both teachers and learners. In the end, the goal was for blind learners to be 
able  to  interact  and  become  socially  integrated  through  active  science  video 
gaming and the application of specific science content. The results of this study 
provide  initial  data  and  evidence  that  the  use  of  video  games  such  as  The 
Natomy’s Journey Game can improve the process for the school integration of 
learners with visual disabilities. 

Keywords: Visual disability, sound interface, school integration, science learning. 

1   Introduction 

The use and integration of ICTs into education has been the focus of discussion for 
many  researchers  and  developers  [2,6].  The  use  of  this  kind  of  technology  in 
education, and in particular for complex content such as science, make its integration 
for use by the visually disabled through educational activities especially complicated. 
This is mainly due to the kind of resources required and these students’ lack of one of 
the  most  important  senses  for  the  process  of  observing  natural  phenomenon:  vision 
[9,14].  Children  with  visual  disability  have  more  problems  accessing  information, 
learning  and  putting  basic  operations  into  practice,  and  solving  problems  than  their 
sighted  peers  [23,13].  However,  the  use  of  technology  that  is  correctly  adapted  for 
this kind of disablement can lead to an efficient solution. 

As such, we might ask: In what way can we create a context in which sighted and 
blind students could work collaboratively for effective science learning? In general, in 
several  countries  there  are  special  schools  for  children  with  visual  disabilities  that 
work only with legally blind students as a segregated population. In these cases, there 
are usually scarce resources,  which impede  working  in the same conditions as their 
peers in school integrated classes (mainstreaming). 

T. Gross et al. (Eds.): INTERACT 2009, Part I, LNCS 5726, pp. 36–49, 2009. 
© IFIP International Federation for Information Processing 2009 

 

Video Gaming for Blind Learners School Integration in Science Classes 

37 

Several  studies  have  shown  that  audio  interfaces  can  be  used  to  foment  learning 
and cognition in blind children [22,24,33]. The use of these audio-based applications 
stimulates  the  utilization  of  general  cognitive  processes,  such  as  tempo-spatial 
orientation, abstract memory and haptic perception [22,24,27].  

In recent years, video games have become a part of the daily life of children and 
school-aged  youth  [15,17]. With  the  progress  of  ICTs,  video  games  have  become  a 
powerful  force  representing  a  part  of  the  daily  activities,  concerns  and  interests  of 
children  and  youth.  In  our  country,  50%  of  students  use  the  Internet  to  play  games 
[1,32]. In the USA, young people between 8 and 18 years old play an average of 49 
minutes  of  video  games  daily,  almost  the  same  amount  of  time  dedicated  to  doing 
homework (50 minutes) and reading (43 minutes) [18]. 

In  this  way,  computer-based  video  games  represent  an  alternative  that  has 
penetrated  distinct  areas  of  education,  mainly  in  their  use  in  the  classroom  [12,30]. 
Such  data  demonstrates  the  potential  importance  of  video  games  in  education  as  a 
structure for the development of different cognitive abilities, such as problem solving, 
analysis, communication, collaboration and information management [29,31].   

In taking into account the high degree of learners’ motivation and interest in video 
games, the potential of these games to develop abilities and the need to integrate their 
use  into  the  formal  education  of  both  blind  and  sighted  users,  we  designed  and 
developed  a  video  game  called  The  Natomy’s  Journey  Game,  for  interactive 
collaboration  between  sighted  and  blind  students. We  also evaluated the  usability  of 
The Natomy’s Journey Game, as well as its impact on the process of school integration 
between blind students and their sighted peers. 

2   Related Work 

In  the  last  few  years  several  software  applications  [20,22,24]  have  been  developed 
involving blind users as the main participants, in order to assist them in their learning 
with  interactive  technology,  focusing  mainly  on  haptic  interfaces  [27]  and  desktop 
applications [22,24]. Also, there are several studies that show the importance of using 
video games for education [12,29,31]. Some important cognitive aspects that can be 
developed  through  the  use  of  video  games  are  the  development  of  competition  and 
concentration  skills,  mobility  skills,  language  and  mathematical  skills,  visual  skills 
and problem-solving skills [3,4,25]. 

However,  there  is  consensus  in  the  literature  that  problem  solving  is  the  most 
important one of all, in that it provides students with tools that can be used not only in 
a school context, but in social and work contexts as well.  

Polya [16] described the process for problem solving in four fundamental steps that 
consist  of  understanding  the  problem,  devising  a  plan,  carrying  out  the  plan  and 
examining the solution obtained. If this does not solve the problem, a new plan has to 
be devised.  

The  current  literature  includes  several  studies  related  to  virtual  environments  and 
problem solving for the blind. In [5], an aid system is proposed for the mobility of a  
 

38 

J. Sánchez and M. Sáenz 

blind  user  through  virtual  reality  mechanisms.  In  [26]  the  authors  developed  virtual 
reality tools so blind users could explore information constructively. In another study, 
a game with 3D navigation, Terraformers, was developed for stimulating development 
and solving tasks in an entertaining way [33]. Recently, some software programs for 
problem solving through interaction with virtual environments designed for users with 
visual  disabilities  have  been  developed  [22,24].  These  programs  use  labyrinths 
represented in different ways through spatial and stereo audio [34,35]. Access Invaders 
[36]  is  a  video  game  that  allows  for  online  playing  between  blind  users  to  solve  a 
shared goal. 

School integration is a very important subject nowadays. There are several studies 
about the present state of integration in the classroom as shown in [10,11,28]. On the 
other  hand,  several  studies  on  the  way  that  technology  can  aid  in  the  school 
integration  of  users  with  different  kinds  of  disabilities  in  the  classroom  have  been 
developed  [7,8].  In  another  example,  in  [19, p.57]  it  was  concluded  that,  “With  the 
large  number  of  mildly  disabled  students  in  our  schools,  it  is  very  important  that 
teachers make every effort to educate their students as best as possible. Evidence has 
shown that technology is one of the best ways to implement this successfully. Using a 
variety  of  software  and  technology  tools  this  process  is  becoming  easier  every  day. 
Teachers  must  also  make  sure  that  they  are  educated  in  how  to  use  these  tools  to 
better  instruct  their  students’  learning.  As  advancements  in  the  field  of  technology 
continue to be  made,  more and  more opportunities  for this level of learning  will be 
available  to  students  and,  as  evidence  has  shown;  more  students  will  have  better 
opportunities to receive the best education possible.” 

In  this  study,  our  proposal  is  The  Natomy’s  Journey  Game,  a  sound-based  game 
that  uses  mobile technology  so that blind and sighted children can interact, become 
socially  integrated  and  learn  science.  In  the  following  we  present  the  main 
characteristics of the software, as well as an evaluation of its use by blind users and its 
impact on the process of school integration with their sighted peers.  

3   The Video Game 

3.1   Video Game Description 

The Natomy’s Journey Game represents four systems of the human body in which the 
student adopts a character with which he/she can interact with other characters in the 
game or in his/her work group, and thus complete the collaborative tasks necessary to 
achieve  a  main  goal.  These  four  systems  are:  the  digestive  system,  the  respiratory 
system, the cardiovascular system and the nervous system. The main problem to solve 
is  to  heal  certain  sicknesses  by  using  the  clues  that  are  provided  to  the  students 
through their interaction and investigation throughout the video game.  

The  video  game  was  made  to  be  used  by  workgroups  of  four  students  working 
simultaneously in a computer lab (with a maximum of 12 groups working at the same 
time). 

 

Video Gaming for Blind Learners School Integration in Science Classes 

39 

The  interaction  with  the  legally  blind  students  is  based  mainly  on  the  use  of  the 
keyboard and feedback provided on their actions through a spatial sound system (4 or 
more speakers distributed in the end-user’s surroundings) (see Figure 3). 

The game can be played in an individual or a group mode. The user must interact 
with the characters and objects in the video game that provide clues and symptoms in 
order  to  solve  the  problem  at  hand.  To  these  ends,  the  progress  of  each  student 
depends  on  the  progress  of  the  rest  of  his/her  team,  thus  creating  a  variety  of 
interactions between the members of the group.  

The game consists of two sicknesses to be discovered (Cholera and Rubella). As 
the player interacts with the characters, they provide information on the sickness and, 
at  the  same  time,  on  the  different  organs  and  specific  functions  of  the  human  body 
necessary  to  make  decisions.  The  students  must  get  to  a  place  in  the  human  body 
called  the  Center  of  Operations,  where  they  enter  an  area  of  mini-video  games  that 
they  must  successfully  complete  in  order  to  pass  to  the  next  level  and  to  beat  the 
game. Each system of the human body consists of 12 scenes that make up the totality 
of the virtual world with which the users must interact.     

3.2   The Video Game Metaphor 

The  video  game  metaphor  consists  of  a  journey  to  within  a  sick  human  body.  This 
journey is taken by a group of four friends who must go to the city of Natomy, where 
a crazy genius (Uncle Isaiah) provides them with a pill that they must take in order to 
shrink in size, to be able to enter the human body.  

3.3   Video Game Architecture 

This  game  was  developed  for  a  PC  platform  in  Macromedia  Director  using  Lingo 
language.  The  following  system  requirements  are  needed  to  run  the  game:  1  GHz 
processor or higher, Microsoft Windows XP SP2, 256 MB RAM, 32 MB DirectX 8 
compatible video and sound card, 4 speakers or headphones for audio, and keyboard. 

The  software  architecture  upon  which  The  Natomy’s  Journey  Game  is  based  has 
two  main  components:  1.  Video  game  engine,  responsible  for  controlling  all  the 
players’ interactions, the logical relations and the dependencies between the different 
systems, 2. Interfaces module, responsible for receiving the users’ actions through the 
keyboard  and,  at  the  same  time,  producing  the  necessary  feedback  through  graphic 
objects and audio. 

Each of the participating users interacts with the interfaces available in the video 
game.  The  users  with  visual  disabilities  (legally  blind)  mostly  used  the  audio 
interfaces,  which  orients  them  and  provides  updated  information  on  the  state  of  the 
video  game.  On  the  other  hand,  the  sighted  users  use  both  interfaces  (audio  and 
visual) to receive all the necessary information to be able to play the game correctly. 

The  information  received  through  the  interfaces  is  processed  as  input  into  the 
game’s  engine,  which  evaluates  and  processes  the  different  logical  interactions 
between  all  the  software’s  components  and  the  dependencies  of  these  components. 
Afterwards, it takes the new information produced by the users’ interaction, which is 
then sent to the interfaces to be provided to the users (see Figure 1). 

 

40 

J. Sánchez and M. Sáenz 

Fig. 1. Architecture of The Natomy’s Journey 
Game 

Fig.  2.  Networking  Architecture  of  The 
Natomy’s Journey Game 

 

 

3.4   Networking Architecture 

The video game’s multi-user interaction is carried out through architecture designed 
over  a  local  network,  in  which  both  desktop  computers  and  wireless  mobile 
computers connected through WIFI can be used (see Figure 2). 

3.5   Interfaces 

Audio  Interfaces.  The  audio  interface  developed  for  The  Natomy’s  Journey  Game 
consists  of  a  combination  of  stereo  and  spatial  sound.  The  stereo  sound  is  utilized 
mostly  for  the  voices  in  the  game  used  for  the  instructions,  the  different  menus, 
dialogues and some objects in the different scenes. The spatial sound is used mostly to 
identify  the  objects  in  the  spatial  environment  (see  Figure  3).  This  last  system  was 
designed  so  that  the  students  with  visual  disabilities  could  orient  themselves  and 
recognize  the  position  of  the  objects,  doors  and  characters  in  the  scene.  This 
corresponds to certain audio elements that are constantly reproduced during the game, 
such as the entry, exit and doors to the systems of the human body, as well as other 
elements  that  are  reproduced  on-demand,  such  as  the  position  of  objects  and 
characters.   

To create a spatial immersion of the user into the virtual environment, the speaker 
system  must  be  located  properly.  The  front  left  and  front  right  speakers  must  be 
placed  in  an  angle  of  45  or  60  degrees.  In  addition,  the  3  frontal  speakers  must  be 
placed at the same level. The rear speakers must be located behind the user and a little 
above  his  ears  (see  Figure  3).  Depending  upon  how  the  sound  was  used,  different 
levels  of  user  immersion  were  attained.  The  use  of  the  spatial  sound  attained  the 
highest  level  of  user’s  immersion  allowing  for  a  high  fidelity  representation  of  the 
audio in a real environment which points out to the user the position of objects and 
their location within the environment. 

Audio  interfaces  were  implemented  using  MS  Directx,  in  particular  the  dxSound 
for Lingo library. This allowed for producing and controlling dynamically the spatial 
sound of the video game. 

 

 

Video Gaming for Blind Learners School Integration in Science Classes 

41 

Fig. 3. Scenario for the use of the spatial sound 

 

Visual Interfaces. The visual interfaces developed for the video game The Natomy’s 
Journey Game correspond to caricaturized abstractions of the systems and organs of 
the human body as well as objects in the game. 
 

Fig. 4. Systems of the Human Body Representations in The Natomy’s Journey Game 

 

The  graphic  interfaces  for  the  systems  of  the  human  body  correspond  to  an 
integrated set of scenes that are coherently represented for the simulation of traveling 
through each of the systems. The figure 4 corresponds to the maps of each system of 
the  human  body,  subdivided  into  12  scenes  with  which  the  student  interacts  and 
through which he/she travels.  

Fig. 5. Some Avatars and Characters in The Natomy’s Journey Game 

 

Avatars  and  Characters.  Each  student  can  pick  from  a  total  of  8  characters.  The 
characters  designed  correspond  mainly  to  organs  of  the  human  body,  made  into 
caricatures so that the students interact with them naturally and in the context of the 
system in  which they are playing. Figure 5 shows some characters in the biological 
systems.  

Main  Interfaces.  The  game  begins  with  an  animated  introduction  according  to  the 
metaphor defined, which explains to the student the tasks that he/she has to undertake 
in  the  video  game.  Then  there  is  an  interface  that  corresponds  to  the  main  menu, 

42 

J. Sánchez and M. Sáenz 

where the user can select the kind of play (stand alone or group work), the group with 
which  he/she  will play in  the game and the avatar,  which  will be the character that 
will represent him/her in the video game (see Figure 6a). After this, the student begins 
to play and can travel through the systems where he/she will be able to meet up with 
the other members of his/her group (see Figure 6b).      
 

(a)

   (b) 

 

Fig. 6. Visual Interfaces of the The Natomy’s Journey Game 

3.6   Model for the Virtual Environment 

The  navigation  through  different  virtual  environments  and  spaces  replicates  a 
successful  model  used  for  commercial  videogames  which  follow  a  third-person 
metaphor with a camera view fixed from an above and behind position.  This model 
of navigation has been adjusted to the needs of blind children, having added auditory 
cues of spatial sound which allows them to form a mental construction of the space.   

The representation of the surroundings is described in a XML file in which all the 
attributes  that  characterize  the  different  scenes  can  be  found.  The  XML  structure 
contains a series of elements that define the storylines, which can also be modified, 
extended or eliminated. 

4   Evaluation 

4.1   The Sample 

To evaluate the impact of the use of The Natomy’s Journey Game, a study was made 
with sixth and seventh-grade blind and sighted children between the ages of 11 and 14 
years old. Tests were applied in seven mainstream public schools in Santiago de Chile 
during 4 months, with the participation of 15 teachers and 326 learners. Eight legally 
blind learners participated in this study (2 with partial vision and 6 totally blind). 

4.2   Evaluation Instruments 

End-user questionnaire: This instrument was applied to evaluate the interface of The 
Natomy’s  Journey  Game  through  4  dimensions:  game  satisfaction,  control  and  use, 
images  and  sounds  quality  [21].  This  questionnaire  consisted  of  18  sentences  for 
which  the  users  must  define  to  what  degree  each  of  them  was  fulfilled,  on  a  scale 
from A Little to A Lot, with quantitative values from 1 (a little) to 10 (a lot). Some of 
the sentences were: “I like the videogame”, “The videogame makes me active”, “I felt 

 

Video Gaming for Blind Learners School Integration in Science Classes 

43 

I  could  control  the  videogame’s  situations”,  “The  videogame  is  interactive”,  “The 
videogame  allowed  me  to  understand  new  things”,  “I  like  the  sounds  in  the 
videogame”, “The sounds in the videogame are clearly identifiable”, and “The sounds 
in the videogame provide me with information” 

 

Written  guideline  for  the  evaluation  of  school  integration:  To  evaluate  the  level  of 
integration, a written guideline was applied in which each participating student had to 
answer with opinions regarding the following four dimensions: 
 
-  Autonomy  refers  to  the  help  that  the  students  received  to  carry  out  the  activities, 
such as tasks or movements (on a scale of 1 to 5, the higher the score, the higher 
the autonomy). 

-  Teaching/learning style refers to how the students perceived their learning style in 
relation  to  the  way  in  which  classes  are  held  in  the  school  (scale  of  1  to  5,  the 
higher the score the lower the agreement with the teaching style). 

-  Belonging  to  the  school  refers  to  the  sense  of  belonging  that  the  students  had 
regarding their school; this asked if they felt integrated and if they identified with 
their class and school (on a scale of 1 to 5, the higher the score the higher the sense 
of belonging).  

-  School Integration refers to the opinion that they had on discriminatory practices or 
practices of school integration (on a scale of 1 to 5, the higher the score, the higher 
their disagreement with discrimination).   

4.3   Procedure 

The entire intervention lasted for 4 months in each school. This period was divided 
into 24 work sessions: 12 of group work with the software in the computer lab in each 
school,  and  12  of  group  work  in  the  classroom  using  material  designed  specifically 
for  the  study  (board  games,  models  and  activities  involving  the  building  of  objects 
having to do with the concepts of the human body).   

All throughout the execution of the study we also performed constant monitoring 
of the participating schools, which implied visits to the classrooms and computer labs, 
as well as communicating the activities through telephone and email. By the end of 
the  fourth  month  of  intervention  and  after  the  last  gaming  session,  the  students 
answered the end-user questionnaire.  

Among  the  methods  for  evaluating  the  results,  a  series  of  both  qualitative  and 
quantitative  applications  were  used,  collecting  data  from  the  actors  involved  in  the 
development  of  the  study,  teachers  and  the  participating  students.  In  the  case  of  the 
students,  quantitative  instruments  were  applied  at  the  beginning  and  the  end  of  
the study, in order to obtain opinions on the development of the stuffy and to prove that 
the users accepted the video game, and that it motivated them to use these virtual tools.  

4.4   Results 

Usability Results: The results obtained from the application of the end user usability 
test  could  be  grouped  into  4  dimensions:  Game  satisfaction,  control  and  use  of  the 
videogame, sound quality, and image and color quality. 

 

44 

J. Sánchez and M. Sáenz 

Fig. 7. (a) Usability Results by Dimension. (b) Usability Results by Gender. 

 

 

As can be seen in the figure 7a, the means obtained in each of the dimensions were 
high and showed that there were no big differences between the learners´ valuations 
of  the  different  areas  analyzed  regarding  the  usability  of  the  software,  as  all  the 
answers were located in the “agree” category. 

Although there were no big differences, it could be observed that the area with the 
highest score was that related to the quality of the game’s sounds (mean of 4 points 
out  of  a  maximum  of  5),  which  were  agreeable  and  identifiable  for  the  users.  This 
ends up being very important considering that the game was designed so that learners 
with visual disabilities could participate. The game’s images and the satisfaction with 
the game came in a close second, having obtained 3.9 points, which indicated that the 
design of the images helped to transmit information to the user and that the students 
liked the software in general, had fun with it, were challenged by it, believed that they 
learned from it and that it  was able to capture their attention. The evaluation of the 
control and use of the game was similar (3.8 points), based on the fact that the users 
felt  in  control  of  the  game,  that  they  could  perform  different  actions  or  stop 
performing actions  whenever they  wanted to, and on their perception that  the game 
was  interactive  and  easy  to  play,  easy  to  use,  motivating  and  with  an  interface  that 
allowed the users to do anything simply and quickly. 

It is important to point out the differentiation between the results obtained for the 
men and the women (figure 7b), as statistically significant differences were found in 3 
of the 4 dimensions. In all 4 dimensions the women presented higher means than the 
men,  and  it  was  in  the  areas  concerning  use  and  control  of  the  game  (t  =  3.905; 
p<0.05), sound quality (t = 4.202; p<0.05) and image quality (t = 2.322; p<0.05) that 
the differences were statistically significant. As for the dimension having to do with 
“game satisfaction”, although the women presented a higher mean score than the men, 
this difference was not significant (t = 1.915; p>0.05). 

To  better  understand  the  result  of  the  usability  evaluation  is  necessary  to  do  a 
context analysis where the game was used. As a collaborative game, learners played 
in a group of 4 students and synchronically, sometimes saturating the audio between 
the four games. In general, the game contained heavy load of speech audio; audio that 
could be boring for the sighted gamers. Although there were high quality graphics in 
The Natomy's Journey Game including significant details, color and animation, they 
were not 3D graphics as learners are used today. Being primarily oriented to legally 
blind learners, the interaction relied strongly on keyboard, leaving aside devices such 
as mouse, joystick or gamepad. 

 

School  Integration  Results:  Regarding  the  items  that  referred  to  the  students’ 
autonomy  in  carrying  out  their  activities,  we  focused  on  the  students  with  visual 

 

Video Gaming for Blind Learners School Integration in Science Classes 

45 

disabilities. As shown in the figure 8a, there was an increase in the score between the 
pretest and the posttest for each one of the items. For the statement indicating that the 
students carried out most of their activities without assistance, there was an increase 
of 1.1 points between the pretest and the posttest (pretest = 2.2 points; posttest = 3.3 
points).  For  the  item  indicating  that  the  students  tried  to  carry  out  their  activities 
without help, there was an increase of 0.9 points (pretest = 2.9 points; posttest = 3.8 
points); and for the item on whether or not the student studied with help from his/her 
parents  or  another  person,  there  was  an  increase  of  0.2  points  (pretest = 4.2 points; 
posttest = 4.4 points).   
 

A. I carry out most of my activities without the help of my 
parents or another person. 
 
B. I study with the help of my parents or another person. 
 
C. I try to carry out my activities without help.  

 

A.  I feel that my  way of  learning is different from that of 
my classmates. 
  
B. My  way  of  learning  has nothing to  do  with  the  classes 
taught by the teachers. 
 
C.  I wish the classes were different  

 

 

 

 

Fig. 8. Integration Results. (a) Autonomy. (b) Learning Style. 

As for the proximity between the classes and the students’ learning styles, the figure 
8b shows the means obtained from the students before and after having participated in 
the study, demonstrating very similar means. Only for the item that indicated that the 
students felt that their way of learning was different from their classmates was there a 
decrease pretest-posttest of 0.2 points (pretest = 3.6 points; posttest = 3.4 points) with a 
significant difference (t = 2.431; p<0.05; df= 546). This showed that after the study the 
blind  students  considered their  way  of  learning  to be  closer  to  those of  their  sighted 
classmates than when they first began to use the video game. 

Regarding  the  sense  of  belonging  that  the  students  had  with  their  class  and  their 
school, there were no major differences in the opinions provided before and after the 
study (see Figure 9). For the item indicating that they felt identified with the majority 
of their classmates, a higher mean was obtained (a difference of 0.4 points between 
the  pretest  and  the  posttest,  pretest=2.2  points;  posttest=2.6  points),  which  was  also 
statistically significant (t= -2.374; p<0.05; df= 538). This is to say that by the end of 
the study the students’ experienced a higher degree of identification with their class, 
even though this was one of the lowest scoring items. The other items in which there 
was a pretest – posttest gain were: “I don’t feel that my classmates bother me” (0.1 
points difference, pretest=3.1 points; posttest=3.2 points; t= -0.077; p<0.05; df= 539) 

46 

J. Sánchez and M. Sáenz 

and “I feel a part of my class” (0.2 points difference, pretest=3.7 points; posttest=3.9 
points; t= -1.610; p<0.05; df= 536). The items that had no variation were: “I identify 
with my group of classmates” (mean of 3.5 points in both tests, t= 2.793; p<0.05; df= 
538) and “I like my classmates” (mean of 3.1 points in both tests, t= 0.022; p<0.05; 
df= 538).  
 

A. I feel like I identify with most of my 
classmates. 
B. I don’t feel that my classmates bother 
me. 
C. I feel a part of my class. 
D. I identify with my group of 
classmates. 
E. I like my classmates.  

 

Fig. 9. Integration Results. Sense of belonging to their school. 

The  scores  obtained  for  the  opinions  provided  on  the  students’  perspectives  on 
school  integration  or  discriminatory  practices  did  not  present  any  pretest  –  posttest 
gains  (see  Figure  10).  It  is  important  to  point  out  that  the  students’  opinions,  both 
before and after the intervention, had means higher than 4.4 points, which indicated 
their  rejection  of  discriminatory  practices  and  their  approval  of  the  idea  that  all 
students have the right to an education and that everyone is different. 

As  for  the  opinions  provided  by  the  participating  teachers  regarding  school 
integration,  measurements  were  taken  both  at  the  beginning  of  the  study  and  at  the 
end,  to  be  able  to  compare  the  possible  changes  that  took  place.  One  important 
situation that was observed is that there was an increase in the percentage of teachers 
that stated having had experience with school integration, from 60% at the beginning 
to 72.7% at the end, so considering this experience with The Natomy’s Journey Game 
as school integration with technology.  
 

 

A. Discrimination is a bad thing. 
B. All of us students have a right 
to education. 
 C.  All  of  us  students  are 
different. 

 

Fig. 10. Integration Results. School Integration. 

In  asking  the  teachers  if  they  had  implemented  some  strategy  in  the  past  three 
months for the integration of a student with visual disability, we also found that there 
was an increase in the final measurement, in that while initially 77.8% of the teachers 
had indicated “yes”, at the end of the study 90.9% responded with a “yes”.  

Finally,  in  asking  the  teachers  about  how  they  felt  working  in  the  classroom  with 
visually disabled students, an increase in those teachers that indicated feeling self-assured 

 

Video Gaming for Blind Learners School Integration in Science Classes 

47 

was  observed,  going  from  50%  for  the  initial  measurement  to  63.7%  in  the  final 
measurement.  

It  is  important  to  mention  that  the  integration  of  learners  with  visual  disabilities 
with the classroom and school classmates requires extended and sustained amount of 
work time that must be transversal at all school activities. Even though this fact it was 
possible to observe some advances as some participating teachers mentioned: “ I felt 
that in some moments he (the blind child) became part of something”, “I saw him for 
the  first  time  integrated  to  a  team  work…and  the  group  accepted  him  for  sharing 
purposes”,  “I  saw  him  integrated  and  a  little  more  respected  by  their  classmates 
because  he  tend  to  establish  a  negative  relation  with  his  classmates,  in  a  defensive 
mode,  but  at  the  end  of  this  experience  his  classmates  accepted  him  well”.  All  this 
assertions  evidence  qualitative  relevant  changes  for  the  learner’s  integration 
considering that at the beginning it was observed that students were mostly excluded 
from  their  class,  ending  up  as  a  result  of  participating  in  this  study,  with  a  more 
egalitarian participation in the project. 

5   Conclusions 

As a result of this study a video game for science learning by middle school blind and 
sighted learners  was constructed and evaluated, to judge  whether blind learners can 
interact and become socially integrated through the use of problem-solving skills and 
the application of specific science content. 

The  results  of  this  study  provide  initial  data  and  evidence  that  the  use  of  video 
games such as The Natomy’s Journey Game can improve the process for the school 
integration of learners with visual disabilities. 

During the implementation process we made a non-participant observation to collect 
information about how learners and teachers appropriated and learned the methodology 
used. From these observations we could detect similar behaviors between learners during 
video gaming, as far as understanding controls and discovering new paths and goals. The 
participation of blind learners in particular was active and with high motivation. 

The Natomy’s Journey Game proposes a new way to learn science, especially the 
systems  of  the  human  body.  The  main  achievement  after  using  this  game  is  that 
learners take an active role, learning in an interactive and motivated way. The learners 
enjoyed  this  new  way  of  learning,  felt  motivated  and  participated  actively  and 
collaboratively in the tasks they had to undertake in the game.   

In  terms  of  school  integration,  this  game  helps  to  create  a  work  environment  in 
which differences are forgotten and children interact freely. They share ideas on how 
to solve the proposed problem as well as content knowledge among all four members 
of each team. 

The  Natomy’s  Journey  Game  allows  blind  children  to  become  more  socially 
integrated  with their  sighted  classmates, to participate actively in  society, and to be 
interested  in  the  active  learning  of  contents  and  new  pedagogical  ways  of  learning 
such as digital mobile gaming. Based on the children’s comments, we point to the fact 
that the game allowed legally blind children to work together with their sighted peers, 
feeling part of the group, and this is very important issue in order to achieve a better 
and  more  complete  education  not  only  in  terms  of  learning  contents,  but  of  school 
integration and teamwork skills as well. 

48 

J. Sánchez and M. Sáenz 

Acknowledgments.  This  report  was  funded  by  the  Chilean  Ministry  of  Education, 
Innovation Program, Project “Digital Inclusion for the Science Learning” and Project 
CIE-05 Program Center Education PBCT-CONICYT. 

References 

1.  Adimark, VTR, & EducarChile. Indice de generación digital 2006 (2006), 

http://www.educarchile.cl/UserFiles/P0001/File/ 
IGD%202006%20seminario  
(Last Accessed July, 2007)  

2.  Balanskat, A., Blamire, R., Kefala, S.: A Review of Studies of ICT Impact on Schools in 

Europe. Europan SchoolNet (December 2006) 

3.  Cavazos, J.: Computer games. Crossroads 3(2) (Winter 1996) 
4.  Ellis, J.: Computer games and aggressive behavior: A review of the literature. Educational 

Technology 30(2), 37–40 (1990) 

5.  Everingham,  M.,  Thomas,  B.,  Troscianko,  T.,  Easty,  D.:  Neural-network  virtual  reality 
mobility  aid  for  the  severely  visually  impaired.  In:  Proceedings  of  2nd  European 
Conference  on  Disability,  Virtual  Reality  and  Associated  Technologies,  pp.  183–192 
(1998) 

6.  Facer, K., Joiner, R., Stanton, D., Reid, J., Hull, R., Kirk, D.: Savannah: mobile gaming 

and learning? Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 20, 399–409 (2004) 

7.  Feyerer,  E.:  Computer  and  Inclusive  Education.  In:  Miesenberger,  K.,  Klaus,  J.,  Zagler, 

W.L. (eds.) ICCHP 2002. LNCS, vol. 2398, pp. 64–67. Springer, Heidelberg (2002) 

8.  Feyerer, E., Miesenberger, K.,  Wohlhart, D.: ICT and Assistive Technology in Teachers 
Education and Training. In: Miesenberger, K., Klaus, J., Zagler, W.L. (eds.) ICCHP 2002. 
LNCS, vol. 2398, pp. 297–334. Springer, Heidelberg (2002) 

9.  Hand, B., Alvermann, D., Gee, J., Guzzetti, B., Norris, S., Phillips, L., Prain, V., Yore, L.: 
Message from the “Island Group”: What is literacy in science literacy? Journal of Research 
in Science Teaching 40(7), 607–615 (2003) 

10.  DeSimone,  J.R.,  Parmar,  R.S.:  Middle  School  Mathematics  Teachers’  Beliefs  About 
Inclusion  of  Students  with  Learning  Disabilities.  Learning  Disabilities  Research  & 
Practice 21(2), 98–110 (2006) 

11.  Kalyanpur,  M.,  Kirmani,  M.:  Diversity  and  Technology:  Classroom  Implications  of  the 

Digital Divide. Journal of Special Education Technology 20(4), 9–18 (Fall 2005) 

12.  Kirriemuir,  J.,  McFarlane,  A.E.:  Use  of  Computer  and  Video  Games  in  the  Classroom. 

Presentation to DiGRA, Utrecht (2003b) 

13.  Kulyukin,  V.,  Gharpure,  C.,  Nicholson,  J.,  Pavithran,  S.:  RFID  in  robot-assisted  indoor 
navigation  for  the  visually  impaired.  In:  Kulyukin,  V.,  Gharpure,  C.,  Nicholson,  J., 
Pavithran,  S.  (eds.)  IEEE/RSJ  Intelligent  Robots  and  Systems  (IROS  2004)  Conference, 
September - October 2004, pp. 1979–1984. Sendai Kyodo Printing, Sendai (2004) 

14.  Kumar,  D.,  Ramasamy,  R.,  Stefanich,  G.:  Science  instruction  for  students  with  visual 

impairments. In: ERIC 464805, pp. 1–2 (2001) 

15.  Mayo,  M.:  Games  for  Science  and  Engineering  Education.  Communications  of  the 

ACM 30(35), 30–35 (2007) 

16.  Polya, G.: How to Sove It, A new Aspect of Mathematical Method. Princeton University 

Press, New Jersey (1973) 

17.  Prensky, M.: Digital game-based learning. Computers in Entertainment 1(1), 21 (2003) 
18.  Rideout, V., Roberts, D., Foehr, U.: Generation m: Media in the lives of 8-18 year-olds, 

pp. 8–18. Henry Kayser Family Foundation, Menlo Park (2005) 

 

Video Gaming for Blind Learners School Integration in Science Classes 

49 

19.  Roper,  R.:  Using  technology  to  teach  students  with  mild  disabilities:  current  trends  and 
future  technologies.  Law  and  Disorder,  Undergraduate  Journal  in  Special  Education 
Law (1), 54–58 (2006) 

20.  Sahyun,  S.,  Gardner,  S.,  Gardner,  C.:  Audio  and  Haptic  Access  to  Math  and  Science  -
Audio graphs, Triangle, the MathPlus Toolbox, and the Tiger printer. In: Proceedings of 
the 15th IFIP World Computer Congress, Vienna, September 1998, pp. 78–86 (1998) 

21.  Sánchez,  J.:  End-user  and  facilitator  questionnaire  for  Software  Usability.  In:  Usability 

evaluation test, Santiago, University of Chile (2003) 

22.  Sánchez,  J.:  Mobile  Science  Learning  and  Inclusion  for  Blind  People.  In:  13th  Annual 

CyberTherapy Conference, San Diego, CA, June 23-25 (2008) 

23.  Sánchez,  J.,  Sáenz,  M.:  Developing  Mathematics  Skills  through  Audio  Interfaces.  In: 
Proceedings of 11th International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction, HCI 2005, 
Las Vegas, Nevada, USA, July 22-27 (2005) (to be published) 

24.  Sánchez,  J.,  Sáenz,  M.:  Usability  of  Audio-Based  Virtual  Environments  for  Users  with 
Visual Disabilities. In: Virtual Reality and Human Behavior Symposium, LAVAL Virtual 
2007, Laval, France, April 18-22 (2007) 

25.  Sánchez, J., Salinas, A.: Science Problem Solving Learning through Mobile Gaming. In: 

MindTrek 2008 Conference, Tampere, Finland, October 8-9, pp. 49–53 (2008) 

26.  Schneider,  J.,  Strothotte,  T.:  Constructive  Exploration  of  Spatial  Information  by  Blind 
Users. In: Proceedings of ACM ASSETS 2000, Arlington, Virginia, November 13-15, pp. 
188–192 (2000) 

27.  Sjostrom, C.: Using haptics in computer interfaces for blind people. In: Sjostrom, C. (ed.) 
Proceeding  of  the  ACM  CHI  2001, Seattle,  Washington,  USA,  March  31 –  April  5, pp. 
245–246 (2001) 

28.  Sloan,  D.,  Phipps,  L.:  Helping  to  avoid  e-discrimination  in  UK  tertiary  education.  In: 
Proceedings of the 2003 conference on Universal usability, Vancouver, British Columbia, 
Canada, pp. 150–151 (2003) 

29.  Squire, K.: Video Games In Education. International Journal of Intelligent Simulations and 

Gaming 2(1), 49–62 (2003) 

30.  Squire, K.: Video games in education. International Journal of Intelligent Simulations and 

Gaming 2(1), 49–62 (2003) 

31.  Steinkuehler,  C.:  Learning  in  massively  multiplayer  online  games.  In:  Kafai,  Y.B., 
Sandoval,  W.A.,  Enyedy,  N.,  Nixon,  A.S.,  Herrera,  F.  (eds.)  Proceedings  of  the  6th 
International Conference of the Learning Sciences, pp. 521–528. Erlbaum, Mahwah (2004) 

32.  El Mercurio Newspaper (Chile), Edition of Sunday, Section C (June 15, 2008) 
33.  Westin, T.: Game accessibility case study: Terraformers – a real-time 3D graphic game. In: 
Proceedings  of  the  5th  International  Conference  on  Disability,  Virtual  Reality  and 
Associated Technologies, ICDVRAT 2004, Oxford, UK, pp. 95–100 (2004) 

34.  Eriksson,  Y.,  Gärdenfors,  D.:  Computer  games  for  children  with visual  impairments.  In: 
Proceedings  of  the  5th  International  conference  on  Disability,  Virtual  Reality  and 
Associated Technologies, New College, Oxford, UK, September 20-22, pp. 79–86 (2004) 

35.  Archambault,  D.,  Olivier,  D.:  How  to  make  games  for  visually  impaired  children.  In: 
Proceedings  of  the  2005  ACM  SIGCHI  international  Conference  on  Advances  in 
Computer  Entertainment  Technology.  ACE  2005,  June  15  -  17,  vol. 265,  pp.  450–453. 
ACM, New York (2005) 

36.  Grammenos, D., Savidis, A., Georgalis, Y., Stephanidis, C.: Access Invaders: Developing 
a  Universally  Accessible  Action  Game.  In:  Miesenberger,  K.,  et  al.  (eds.)  ICCHP  2006. 
LNCS, vol. 4061, pp. 388–395. Springer, Heidelberg (2006) 

