AudioStoryTeller: Enforcing Blind Children Reading 

Skills 

Jaime Sánchez and Iván Galáz 

Department of Computer Science 

{jsanchez,igalaz}@dcc.uchile.cl 

University of Chile 

Abstract.  Children  tend  to  learn  language  conventions  through  processing 
environment stimuli. Thus, strategies for reading comprehension are commonly 
used  for  this  purpose.  This  paper  introduces  AudioStoryTeller,  a  tool  for 
pocketPC to support the development of reading and writing skills in learners 
with  visual  disabilities  (LWVD)  through  storytelling,  providing  diverse 
evaluation  tools  to  measure  those  skills.  We  implemented  usability  and 
cognitive  evaluation  to  the  AudioStoryTeller  software.  In  the  usability 
evaluation,  the  easiness  of  use  of  the  proposed  hardware  by  LWVD  was 
established.  The  goal  of  the  cognitive  evaluation  was  to  measure  the 
development  of  reading  skills  through  interactive  audio  narrations  using  a 
pocketPC device. Results indicate that users were able to utilize effortless the 
pocketPC device. AudioStoryTeller software together with cognitive tasks, can 
contribute  to  the  development  of  cognitive  skills  in  LWVD.  This  application 
allows LVD to have access to unlimited scope of books not available in printed 
Braille.  

Keywords:  Learners  with  visual  disabilities,  blind  children,  reading  skills, 
PDA, pocketPC, Text-To-Speech, Audio. 

1   Introduction 

In the course of their life-span people learn some rules of the language from diverse 
stimuli, facilitating verbal and written communication and saving from learning them 
formally.  The  early  use  of  these  rules  and  their  integration  are  fundamental  for  the 
development of the intellectual capacity of these people and their later integration into 
society [2,18]. 

Braille  is  commonly  used  to  read  and  write  by  LWVD.  One  of  the  main 
disadvantages is that it is a too slow process compared to graphic sources decreasing 
the child’s motivation and restraining the capacity to develop reading comprehension 
skills such analysis, abstraction, and evaluation.  

Diverse  mobile 

for 

applications  have  been  used 

learning  purposes 
[3,4,9,14,15,16,17].  Grams  [8]  developed  a  study  to  determine  the  motivation  for 
learning  by  using  a  PDA,  finding  that  the  use  of  these  devices  motivated  more 
independent  reading  than  traditional  ways  of  reading.  Books  embedded  in  mobile 
devices such as e-books improved the motivation to read. Freeman [6] predicted that 

C. Stephanidis (Ed.): Universal Access in HCI, Part III, HCII 2007, LNCS 4556, pp. 786–795, 2007. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007 

 

AudioStoryTeller: Enforcing Blind Children Reading Skills 

787 

this  way  of  book  reading  will  be  very  popular  in  the  future  by  integrating  them  in 
work spaces and everyday life of ordinary people.  

Methodologies  [10]  and  applications  [11,12,13]  have  been  developed  to  support 
learning  in  LWVD  obtaining  positive  gains  in  the  development  of  tempo-spatial 
skills,  memory  and  mathematical  logical  analysis.  Nevertheless,  these  applications 
restrict their implementation to a static context as the school classroom and home.  In 
this study, we want to extend this work to other places and contexts that require users 
to  carry  out  their  readings  as  sighted  people  carries  them  in  subway,  bus,  airplanes 
and  the  like,  by  taking  advantage  of  their  dead  times.  Discovering  how  technology 
supports reading activities for LWVD and the issues involved by the loss of vision is 
a key goal in our investigation.   

We  present  AudioStoryTeller  (AST),  LWVD-centered  design  based  on  Text-toSpeech 
 (TTS)  for  pocketPC.  This  software  is  a  tool  to  support  the  development  of 
reading and writing skills in LWVD through storytelling, providing diverse evaluation 
tools to measure these skills. AST has been implemented through auditory interfaces 
and all users’ actions are performed through auditory feedback. A visual support for a 
fast localization by facilitators when blind children are performing tasks with AST is 
also provided. 

2   AudioStoryTeller 

AST is an application to support reading and writing abilities of LWVD through the 
narration  of  stories  containing  several  evaluations  forms  of  these  skills,  such  as 
questionnaires,  word  replacement  by  synonymous,  construction  and  completing  of 
new  chapters.  The  user’s  interaction  is  through  audio  interfaces.  Each  user’s  action 
contains a corresponding audio feedback, considering also visual support for children 
with residual vision. Several design hints proposed by Dunlop and Brewster [5] have 
been  considered.  However,  considering  the  target  users  the  multi-task  option  was 
removed.  

AST is a contribution to the storytelling context and reading software for pocketPC 
such TextAloud1 and Mobipocket2, because it considers virtual access to any text that 
a teacher or tutor consider relevant. They just need to have a digital document in text 
format  to  integrate  it  to  a  text  list  to  be  reproduced  by  AST. This  tool  provides:  1. 
Mobility  to  the  user,  2.  Taking  advantage  of  dead  spaces  during  activities,  and  3. 
Personalized evaluation through automatic evaluation. All these features are intended 
to improve the autonomy of learners and early stimulation of self-learning techniques. 

2.1   Navigation Model 

The metaphor utilized is one of a library. The reader chooses a book, selects a desired 
chapter and then proceeds to read it. The access to different chapters and move within 
a  particular  chapter  has  an  important  resemblance  to  natural  reading  of  a  sighted 
individual. When he or she finishes a story accessible evaluations are available.  

                                                           
1 TextAloud, http://www.nextup.com/ 
2 Mobipocket Reader, http://www.mobipocket.com/ 

788 

J. Sánchez and I. Galáz 

AST has four evaluation methods: (A) Wrong Chapter Selection. The story to be 
played has a chapter that does not belong to its dramatic plot, and learners should be 
able to detect it; (B) Synonymous. Several sentences from the story are presented and 
particular  words  are  to  be  replaced  with  a  synonym  from  a  list  provided  by  the 
software;  (C)  Questionnaires.  Several  multiple  choice  questions  are  presented  and 
learners have to choose the right answer; and (D) Final Construction of the Story. In 
this evaluation the child listen to a chapter of a story to be completed, then, he or she 
can choose the corresponding adjective, verb and noun to each sentence in the chapter 
(see Figure 1).  

Fig. 1. Navigation Model of AudioStoryTeller 

 

2.2   Control 

To interact with AST navigational and functional buttons of a pocketPC are utilized 
(see Figure 1) in order to provide ample access to different sections of the software, 
menus and selection of options.  

The basic actions a user can perform are search and select. For searching, up and 
down navigational buttons are used; while for selecting, the central button is used (see 
Figure  2).  Searches  can  be  made  upon  the  stories,  chapters,  questionnaires,  chapter 
construction sentences, and sentences for synonyms replacement.  

During the playback of stories, users can utilize forward, rewind, and pause/resume 
functions. These functions can be also accessed through navigational buttons, but only 
in the chapter playback section. To move forward or backwards in a timeframe of 60 
seconds,  up  and  down  buttons  are  utilized;  while  for  a  30-seconds  timeframe,  right 
and  left  buttons  are  utilized.  Lastly,  the  pausing,  playing  and  resuming  options  are 
triggered by using the central navigational button.  

Current  menus  are  cyclic,  so  users  can  select  one  option  easily  and  quickly, 

through the central navigational button.  

 

 

AudioStoryTeller: Enforcing Blind Children Reading Skills 

789 

 

Fig.  2.  (A)  Functional  Buttons  and  Navigational  Buttons  (B)  Specific  Directions  of 
Navigational Buttons (up, down, left, right and center) 

2.3   Interfaces: Audio and Visual 

End-users of AST are LWVD with ages between 8 and 14 years. For an effective use 
of the software and considering the target end-users,  we used both visual and audio 
feedback,  for  users  that  have  residual  vision  and  those  totally  blind,  respectively. 
Furthermore,  the  visual  display  helps  the  tutor  to  interact  with  the  software,  thus 
allowing him or her to provide a better guidance for LWVD. Audio cues for the user’s 
actions are implemented. They include: (A) Playing a specific sound  when pressing 
functional  and  navigational  buttons;  (B)  Reading  available  items  of  the  selection 
menu, and (C) Playing the setting information utilized when entering to each section.  
The  help  for  available  actions  and  the  information  for  user’s  awareness  are 
provided through Text-To-Speech (TTS) technology. We avoid mixing TTS and real 
voice recordings because they can be counterproductive for the proposed goal [7].  

3   Usability Evaluation 

3.1   Sample 

The sample consisted of 11 children with ages between 8 and 14 years old from the 
school for the blind “Santa Lucía”, located in Santiago, Chile. Four of them were boys 
and  7  girls,  9  with  residual  vision  and  2  with  total  blindness.  The  vision  disorders 
were  congenital  bilateral  glaucoma,  amaurosis,  congenital  amblyopia  and  retinitis 
pigmentosa.  Two  special  education  teachers,  experts  on  vision  disorders  also 
participated in the evaluations. 

3.2   Instruments 

Two instruments were utilized for testing, one to evaluate each usability session and 
the other to document the observations  made to the  use of the device by end-users: 
(A)  Summarized  End-user  Usability  Evaluation  for  PDA,  and  (B)  Non-formal 
Observation.  

790 

J. Sánchez and I. Galáz 

3.3   Procedure 

Used were tested during seven sessions of one hour and a half each, four sessions in 
September-November,  2005,  and  three  sessions  in  July-August,  2006.  The  whole 
testing was implemented at the school for the blind “Santa Lucía”, in both indoor and 
outdoor environments.  

Each session of the usability testing consisted in the following stages: 1. Software 
presentation,  2.  AST  interaction,  3.  Non-formal  observation,  4.  Photographic 
documentation,  5.  Usability  evaluation,  and  6.  Redesign  according  to  the  results 
obtained.  

3.4   Results 

Learners were able to use the PDA device efficiently and independently. They were 
able  to  locate  the  five  lower  buttons  of  the  pocketPC  without  greater  difficulties. 
Children  preferred  to  use  headphones  instead  of  the  device’s  speaker,  because  the 
volume was too low for them to listen adequately.  

The TTS voice utilized was qualified as unappealing during evaluations. Different 
voices were tested; none of them achieved the desired level of acceptance. Learners 
mentioned that it could be interesting to add background music or sound effects to the 
stories,  to  help  them  to  understand  what  they  were  listening  and  to  represent  the 
context of the narration.  

Fig. 3. Usability Results, Test 1 and Test 2 

 

Interaction  and  interface  features  were  evaluated  throughout  the  development  of 
AST.  Interaction  was  evaluated  mainly  in  terms  of  the  device  handling  and  the 
interaction  with the  menus. The data gathered indicate positive results in both tests, 
observing  an  improvement  of  5.8%  between  the  scores  of  Test  1  and Test 2.  Users 
evaluated the way the information is presented in the interface and how pleasant was 
the experience to use it, ending up with a gain of 2.3% between the scores of Test 1 
and Test2 (see Figure 3).  

 

AudioStoryTeller: Enforcing Blind Children Reading Skills 

791 

4   Cognitive Evaluation 

4.1   Sample 

The sample consisted of 4 middle school boys with ages between 12 and 14 years old 
from the school for the blind “Santa Lucía”, located in Santiago, Chile. Three of them 
had  residual  vision  and  one  was  totally  blind.  The  vision  disorders  they  had  were 
congenital  bilateral  glaucoma,  amaurosis,  congenital  amblyopia  and  retinitis 
pigmentosa. All of them were first-time PDA users.  

4.2   Instruments 

The  instrument  utilized  to  evaluate  the  cognitive  impact  was  the  Progressive 
Linguistic  Complexity  Test  (PLCT)  [1].  This  test  aims  to  evaluate  reading 
comprehension  during  the  first  8  years  of  formal  education.  The  test  is  divided  in 
eight  reading  levels,  each  one  of  them  with  two  different  evaluations.  The  areas 
evaluated through this test are instrumental area and reading comprehension. On the 
one hand, the instrumental area evaluates the performance of reading. On the other, 
the  reading  comprehension  area  evaluates  how  much  the  learner  can  retain  and 
understand. 

The PLCT is a standardized test for Chile. We used the level 7, A and B schemes, 
for  the  pre  and  posttesting  respectively,  in  macrotype  and  Braille  adaptations.  This 
level was selected because evaluates skills to encounter contextual keys, to place facts 
in  their  correct  temporal  and  spatial  position,  to  infer  facts  based  on  the  global 
comprehension of a text, and to grasp the intention of the story.  

Two cognitive tasks were designed to work with AST. The first task consisted in 
have  children  to  represent  the  narrations  listened  in  the  software  through  dramatic 
group games. In the second task, children had to interpret AST’s narrations creating 
new stories.  

4.3   Procedure 

The cognitive evaluation setting was placed at the school for the blind “Santa Lucía” 
during  five  months,  from  August  to  December  2006,  comprising  9  sessions  of  1.5 
hours each. The stages of the evaluation consisted on: (A) Pretesting using PLCT, (B) 
Developing two cognitive tasks while interacting with AST, and (C) Posttesting using 
PLCT.  

After each cognitive task, learners  were evaluated using questionnaires recording 

specific abilities observed and applied by them.  

4.4   Results 

The results have been analyzed according to Z-values of the PLCT. The Z-value is a 
measure unit that let to place a child in comparison with the average and the standard 
deviation of the group. The ranges are between -3 and 3 points, with an average of 0. 
By  taking  into  consideration  this  information  the  real  gain  of  the  students  in 
comparison with their peers was obtained. 

 

792 

J. Sánchez and I. Galáz 

 
Fig. 4. Comparison of Z value between Pretest and Posttest  

Case  3  was  a  totally  blind  participant  that  obtained  the  most  significant 
improvement compared to the sample. He achieved a score gain of 168%. This result 
suggests  that  AST  is  more  suitable  for  totally  blind  learners  than  individuals  with 
residual  vision,  mainly  due  to  the  cognitive  models  of  these  users.  However,  all 
learners improve their pretest scores obtained. In spite of this progress in their reading 
skills, two students remain below the average.  

In  the  first  cognitive  task,  the  comprehension  skills  to  interpret,  memorize  and 
synthesize  were  evaluated.  The  total  sample  obtained  a  percent  average  gain  of 
78,8%,  91,6%  y  92,1%  respectively.  These  results  support  our  beliefs  that  this 
software help users to identify and assimilate meanings, to remember, to identify and 
replicate facts, phrases and ideas inside the narrations, and finally, to synthesize what 
was learned.  

In  the  second  cognitive  task,  the  comprehension  reading  skills  enhanced  were  to 
analyze,  infer,  rebuild  the  meaning  and  evaluate,  the  sample  obtained  a  percent 
average gain of 85,3%,  91,1%, 78,3%  y 92,2% respectively.  

Moreover, in spite of all the criticism used made about the use of the TTS, the data 
indicate that it was a very satisfactory and rewarding experience for them to hear their 
own  creations  in  AudioStoryTeller  and  share  them  with  their  classmates  using  this 
media. After this activity was completed, there was a change in their appreciation and 
valuation of the software, when considering its contribution to allow LWVD to read 
different texts.  

Students  were able to  take elements  from  narrations and  to shape them  into  new 

narrative creations, using their own language and previous experiences.  

Finally, by using AudioStoryTeller students were able to use their auditory sense to 
identify the  main  ideas in a  story,  gathering the  necessary  elements to create a new 
narration based on their own ideas, interest and knowledge.  

5   Conclusions 

The  purpose  of  this  research  was  to  support  reading  comprehension  in  LWVD 
through  interactive  narrations  in  PDA  software.  Usability  and  cognitive  evaluations 
provided very interesting and enriching results.  

 

AudioStoryTeller: Enforcing Blind Children Reading Skills 

793 

The voice interface used for text reading, a TTS (Text-To-Speech) technology, did 
not  have  a  good  level  of  acceptance  by  users.  All  of  them  agreed  to  qualify  it  as 
annoying, “robotic-like”, plain, and slow, with no emphasis or toning whatsoever, so 
they suggested adding some mechanism to manage the reading.  

Results obtained in this study indicate that there were not limitations for UWVD 
when  utilizing  a  pocketPC  device,  since  they  all  agreed  that  it  was  comfortable, 
pleasant to use, and highlighting their shape and size.  

Results  obtained  in  the  application  of  cognitive  tasks  showed  that  learners  were 
capable of identifying meaningful aspects in the content of narrations and to express 
them  orally,  and  using  body  and  gesture  expressions,  through  their  dramatic 
representations.  To  attain  this,  learners  had  to  interact  with  the  software  through 
comprehensive  hearing,  analyze  texts,  identify  tempo-logical  elements  in  the 
narration, and adapt and stage of the play.  

It  is  very  likely  that  this  software  will  help  them  to  identify  and  assimilate 
meanings,  to  remember,  identify  and  replicate  facts,  phrases  and  ideas  of  the 
narrations, and lastly, to synthesize what was learned.  

Students were able to take reference elements gathered through the interaction with 
AST, in order to assimilate them and create new narrations, using their own language 
and previous experiences.  

Finally,  by  using  AST  students  were  able  to  provide  their  hearing  sense  with  an 
intention, in order to identify the main idea and to capture those elements that allow 
them  to  create  new  narrations  based  on  their  own  ideas,  interests  and  previous 
knowledge.  

6   Discussion 

When  individual  interpretation  embedded  in  the  reconstruction  of  knowledge  are 
diminished, we can infer that the teaching practices that these LWVD are accustomed 
to does not promote individual creativity and the free expression of their own ideas 
during different learning activities engaged at the school.  

A PDA device based on audio can reinforce the abilities needed for proper reading 
comprehension in LWVD. However, cognitive processes through audio and reading 
comprehension  imply  the  concourse  of  several  skills,  so  the  software  should  be 
coupled with other resources.  

Learners with visual disabilities can increase their reading comprehension level by 
using the AudioStoryTeller software as a complementary aid for cognitive tasks and 
methodological  and  didactic  designs  that  nurture,  extend  and  widen  the  learning 
possibilities  of  these  users,  through  systematized  and  continuous  use  of  texts  and 
evaluation resources provided by the software. AudioStoryTeller can be enriched by 
adding  narrations  with  different  degrees  of  complexity,  and  evaluations  that  aim  to 
develop and implement several abilities gradually.  

As a result, by using and measuring regularly the achievement and improvement of 
the  level  of  narrative  comprehension  and  the  domain  of  specific  skills  for 
understanding a text, higher levels of reading comprehension can be obtained.  

The  promising  results  obtained  in  this  study  lead  us  to  state  that  blind  users  can 
utilize this type of software to develop their reading  skills,  which can be  ultimately 

794 

J. Sánchez and I. Galáz 

become  an  alternative  to  Braille  books.  AudioStoryTeller  provides  an  easy  way  to 
widen the story collection; therefore it would be possible to grant access to a greater 
literature, widening the reading possibilities of learners with visual disabilities.  
 
Acknowledgments. This report was funded by the Chilean National Fund of Science 
and Technology, Fondecyt, Project 1060797. 

References 

1.  Alliende, F., Condemarín, M., Milicic, N.: CLP Test. Published by Universidad Católica 

de Chile Editions, Santiago Chile (1991) 

2.  Allington,  R.L.:  Critical  issues:  What´s  special  about  reading  program  for  children  who 

find learning to read difficult? Journal of Reading Behavior 26, 95–115 (1994) 

3.  Attewell,  J.:  Mobile  technologies  and  learning:  A  technology  update  and  m-learning 
project  summary.  London:  Learning  and  Skills  Development  Agency  (2005)  Available 
online at http://www.m-learning.org/reports.shtml 

4.  Csete, J., Wong, Y., Vogel, D.: Mobile devices in and out the classroom. In: Cantoni, L., 
McLoughlin  (eds.)  Proceedings  of  ED-MEDIA  2004  World  Conference  on  Educational 
Multimedia, Hypermedia & Telecommunications, pp. 4729–4736 (2004) 

5.  Dunlop,  M.,  Brewster,  S.:  The  Challenge  of  Mobile  Devices  for  Human  Computer 

Interaction. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 6, 235–236 (2002) 

6.  Freeman,  M.:  Midmorning 

in 

the 

e-book 

age.  Reading  Today 

(2000) 

http://www.reading.org/punlications/rty/archives/oct_ebook.html 

7.  Gong, L., Lai, J.: Shall We Mix Synthetic Speech and Human Speech? Impact on Users’ 
Performance,  Perception,  and  Attitude.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  ACM  CHI,  March  31  – 
April 5, 2001, Seattle, Washington, USA, pp. 158–165 (2001) 

8.  Grams, D.: E-books: Motivating students to read independently. A research project report 

submitted to Mingyuan Zhang Central Michigan University, EDU 590 (2003) 

9.  James,  J.,  Beaton,  B.,  Csete,  J.,  Vodel,  D.:  Mobile  educational  games.  In:  Lassner,  D., 
McNaught, C.(eds.) Proceedings of ED-MEDIA 2004 World Conference on Educational 
Multimedia, Hypermedia & Telecommunications, pp. 801–802 (2003) 

10.  Sánchez,  J.,  Baloian,  N.:  Modeling  3D  interactive  environments  for  learners  with  visual 
disabilities.  In:  Miesenberger,  K.,  Klaus,  J.,  Zagler,  W.,  Karshmer,  A.I.  (eds.)  ICCHP 
2006. LNCS, vol. 4061, pp. 1326–1333. Springer, Heidelberg (2006) 

11.  Sánchez, J., Flores, H.: Training Blind Children to Develop Mathematics Skills Through 
Audio. In: Proceedings of the Cybertherapy, Basel, Switzerland, pp. 123–124 (June 6-10, 
2005) 

12.  Sánchez, J., Flores, H., Sáenz, M.: Blind Children Developing Mathematics Skills through 
Audio.  In:  Proceedings  of  ITI  2nd  International  Digital  Media  Conference  in  Egypt, 
DIGIMEDIA 2005 Cairo, Egipto Marzo 7-8, 2005 pp. 155–166 (2005) 

13.  Sánchez,  J.,  Sáenz,  M.:  Sound  Immersed  Virtual  Environments  for  Blind  Children.  In: 
Proceedings of The Fourth International Workshop on Virtual Rehabilitation IWVR ’05. 
Catalina Island, California, USA. September 19-21, 2005 pp. 192–202 (2005) 

14.  Seppala,  P.,  Alamaki,  H.:  Mobile  learning  and  mobility  in  teacher  training.  In:  IEEE 
International  Workshop  on  Wireless  and  Mobile  Technologies  in  Education,  Växjö, 
Sweden, pp. 130–135 (2002) 

 

AudioStoryTeller: Enforcing Blind Children Reading Skills 

795 

15.  Wang,  M.,  Shen,  R.,  Tong,  R., Yang,  F.,  Han, P.:  Mobile  learning  with  Cellphones  and 
PocketPCs.  In:  Lau,  R.W.H.,  Li,  Q.,  Cheung,  R.,  Liu,  W.  (eds.)  ICWL  2005.  LNCS, 
vol. 3583, pp. 332–339. Springer, Heidelberg (2005) 

16.  Williams,  M.,  Jones,  O.,  Fleuriot,  C.,  Wood,  L.:  Children  and  emerging  wireless 
technologies: Investigating the potential for spatial practice. In: Proceedings of ACM CHI, 
Portland, Oregon April 2-7, 2005 pp. 819–828. ACM Press, New York (2005) 

17.  Wills, S.: Wireless, mobile & handheld: Where are our teachers and students going with 
their  computers?  The  power  of  3.  EDUCAUSE  in  Australia  2001:  The  power  of  3 
(Retrieved December 10, 2003) Available online at 

  http://www.gu.edu.au/conference/educause2001/conten2a.html 

18.  Worthy,  J.:  Teachers  and  students  suggestions  for  motivating  middle  school  students  to 

read. Yearbook of the National Reading Conference vol. 49, pp. 441–451 (2000) 

