M2TA - Mobile Mouse Touchscreen

Accessible for Users with Motor Disabilities

Agebson Rocha Façanha1(✉), Maria da Conceição Carneiro Araújo2, Windson Viana2,

and Jaime Sánchez3

1 Federal Institute of Education, Science and Technology of Ceará (IFCE),

Fortaleza, CE, Brazil

agebson@ifce.edu.br

2 Federal University of Ceará (UFC), Fortaleza, CE, Brazil

marianna.c85@gmail.com, windson@virtual.ufc.br

3 Universidad de Chile (UChile), Santiago, Chile

jsanchez@dcc.uchile.cl

Abstract.  This paper addresses the accessibility challenges of people with motor
impairments regarding their access to the computer. Our focus is a new mouse
design,  which  in  its  traditional  ergonomics  may  aﬀect  the  interaction  with  a
computer and, consequently, with the Web. We introduce the design and devel‐
opment  of  a  mobile  application,  the  M2TA,  which  transforms  a  touchscreen
mobile device into a mouse controller. The mobile application provides more
ﬂexible/customizable interfaces, it is portable, and is cheaper. Two users with
motor limitations, cerebral palsy, participated in the development process of the
M2TA. They used mobile interfaces interacting with computer applications of
their preference freely. We aimed to observe possible bugs and receive sugges‐
tions for the M2TA improvement. We also collected their satisfaction with the
use of M2TA interfaces. Preliminary results are promising and indicate a good
level of acceptance. Further studies are in progress to attest the M2TA potential,
such as improving the quality of life of people with neuropsychomotor sequelae
caused by TBI - Traumatic Brain Injury and Stroke - Stroke.
Keywords: Motor disabilities · Ergonomics · Mouse · Mobile devices

1

Introduction

People with motor impairments are excluded from social life in many situations (e.g.,
school, work, and even entertainment). In fact, many daily practices are not adapted for
them. Fortunately, this reality has undergone considerable changes thanks to new public
policies of development and the new paradigms of social inclusion. The development
of accessibility software and tools (i.e., Assistive Technologies (ATs)) has also made it
increasingly possible to provide communication and access to information for people
with  motor  disabilities  independently.  People  with  motor  disabilities  are  closer  to
computers and mobile devices thanks to the emergence of assistive software and adapted
devices [6].

© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018
M. Antona and C. Stephanidis (Eds.): UAHCI 2018, LNCS 10907, pp. 273–286, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-92049-8_20

274

A. Rocha Façanha et al.

Unfortunately, web browsing on computers is still a challenging task for people with
motor disabilities [1]. Keyboard and mouse are the most common input devices for
computer access. In a mouse-based interface (i.e., GUI), cursor movements follow the
users’ hand movement in two-dimensional space. When manipulating a mouse, users
obtain visual and kinesthetic information of movement and position in computer screen
interactions [2, 3]. Previous research has already identiﬁed obstacles faced by people
with motor disabilities when interacting with graphical user interfaces (GUIs) using
these devices [1]. Some people cannot use this device independently because of their
sensory-motor limitations, acquired or congenital [4, 5].

Researchers and practitioners of TA have proposed various types of adapted devices
(e.g.,  BJOY,  HeadDev,  Tobii  PCEye, RCT-Barban,  BigTrack  Trackball,  Orbitrack,
etc.), which provide the same functions of traditional mouse data input. These solutions
make it possible for people with motor impairments the access to the computer resources
(e.g., Web browsing, text editor). But, frequently, these devices have high prices. Some
of them do not have a good quality of ﬁnishing and design. They also suﬀer from the
scarcity of distribution channels, maintenance, and repair places [12, 13].

One of the little known functions that smartphones and tablets have is to enable the
device to be a desktop data entry component. An application running on the device is
connected as a client to an application server computer. This allows the smartphone to
send data as a wireless mouse, for example. There are a wide variety of applications1
that can be used for this, but they are not necessarily interfaces that meet the direct needs
of an individual with motor impairment [22].

Following this trend, our proposal aims at the design and development of layouts
that simulate an accessible mouse on the touchscreen of mobile devices. This mobile
application controls the computer’s cursor over wireless communication. The proposed
solution, M2TA, is a more ﬂexible and customizable tool than the adapted hardware.
The M2TA has greater portability, less ﬁnancial cost, and easy access. By oﬀering
several layouts, the M2TA also allows each user to choose the input interface best suited
to their limitations.

People with motor disabilities and professional specialists in the area of rehabilitation
have participated in the design and development process of M2TA. One of the main
design challenges was the haptic feedback, such as that provided by controlling the
standard mouse. For this, we use haptic devices - levers and other types of joysticks -
over the smartphone touchscreens. Initial reports from users and experts indicate a good
acceptance of M2TA. The diversity of mouse layouts is the M2TA more pleasured
feature. Initial test results show its likely use in improving the quality of life of people
with neuropsychomotor limitations [6].

1 Remote  Mouse  (http://www.remotemouse.net/),  Uniﬁedremote  (https://www.uniﬁedre‐
mote.com/),  PC  Remote  (http://www.monect.com/pc-remote/),  WiFi  Mouse  (http://wiﬁ‐
mouse.necta.us/).

M2TA - Mobile Mouse Touchscreen Accessible for Users with Motor Disabilities

275

2 Related Work
2.1 Adapted Input Devices
Input devices available on the market (e.g., mouse [7], trackball [8], joystick [9], light
pen [10], touchscreen [11], etc.) diﬀer in shape, size, mode, and control. The computer
mouse requires motor skills such as the use of hands and ﬁngers. In this context, people
with motor impairments may face diﬃculties when using the mouse in its standard form.
Some adaptations are applied based on the users’ functional abilities to facilitate the
interaction with computers. For instance, accessible mouses oﬀer alternative data input
modalities  based  on  pressing,  traction,  blowing,  blinking,  and  contracting  of  users
musculature [19]. The use of the foot, mouth, or actions by the displacement of the head,
and movement of the gaze are examples of new input interactions.

Each of the above solutions addresses a diﬀerent strategy for decreasing the limita‐
tion that physical or motor impairment imposes for the total or partial use of the mouse
in its conventional form. Some examples of Assistive Technologies are listed below.
They oﬀer better possibilities of interaction and support the process of digital inclusion
of people with motor disabilities.
– Joystick:  A  pointing  device  in  which  the  movement  of  the  cursor  is  controlled
through  stick  which  the  user  can  move  in  all  directions  and  reproduced  on  the
computer screen. It has two or more buttons for performing the mouse activation
functions. Examples: BJOY2, Talking Joystick Mouse3 and Joystick - For Chin4.

– Mouse controlled by the movement of the head: a resource used by people who
can not use the mouse and the keyboard with the upper or lower limbs, but can move
the head with some control. It is currently possible to control the mouse cursor with
the movement of the head  captured  by  a standard webcam (for example,  Head‐
Mouse5, HeadDev6 and TrackerPro7).

– Mouse controlled by eye movement: suitable for users who can move their eyes
and stare at speciﬁc points in the screen. No head movement is required to promote
the cursor movement (e.g., Tobii PCEye8 and Mouse Eyepiece9).

– Mouse controlled by the lips movement and activated by blow or suction: it
allows the user to operate the computer entirely through mouth. Small lips move‐
ments enable the cursor movement in the computer screen movements, while left and
right clicks are done by a light blow or suction, or even by an external trigger. One

2 https://bjliveat.com/120-bjoy-mice.
3 https://openassistive.org/item/talkingjoystickmouse/.
4 http://www.anditec.pt/index.php?option=com_virtuemart&view=productdetails&virtue‐

mart_product_id=4&virtuemart_category_id=2.

5 http://robotica.udl.cat/headmouse.htm.
6 http://www.fundacionvodafone.es/proyecto/proyecto-headdev.
7 https://www.ablenetinc.com/trackerpro.
8 http://www2.tobiidynavox.com/pceye-go/.
9 http://www.invencoesbrasileiras.com.br/mouse-ocular/.

276

A. Rocha Façanha et al.

of the best known mouse in this category is the Integra Mouse10 designed for people
with high spinal cord injury (quadriplegia), progressive muscular dystrophy, neuro‐
motor diseases and multiple sclerosis.

– Mouse controlled by the feet: the activation of functions and the cursor control is
performed using the feet to facilitate the use, to increase the functionality and to
reduce the adaptation time for users with severe motor limitations in the upper limbs
(Example: Roller Mouse11, Button Mouse12 and RCT-Barban13).

– TrackBall: a device with a ball, of 7 cm in diameter on average that allows the cursor
movement the screen requiring less motor control by the user. It has two large buttons
with functions equivalent to the left and right keys of the conventional mouse with
attractive looks and bright colors (e.g., Big Ball Mouse14 and BigTrack Trackball15).
– Touch sensitive: allows the user to accurately control the cursor speed and direction
on the computer with just a soft touch. It requires the minimum eﬀort and motor
coordination to use the mouse. The touchpad mouse16 and Orbitrack17 are examples
of this type of mouse. The last one has a control ring and does not require extensive
movements of the hands and wrists but only the touch of the ﬁnger.
The assistive technologies listed in Fig. 1 are the most relevant to our study.
However, many other products targeting users with motor impairments are avail‐
able. Frequently, the choice of the most adequate approach depends on its economic
cost. In general, Assistive Technology products are expensive due to their limited
market. This inconvenient, in many cases, makes them unattainable for most of the
users with disabilities.

Fig. 1. Examples of adaptations: (a) RollerMouse, (b) BJoy, (c) Button Mouse, (d) Touchpad.

2.2 The Use of Smartphone as Input Devices
This subsection presents design and implementation research to turn smartphones into
remote computer controllers, allowing users to use smartphones as mouse and keyboard
by operating the computer remotely and wirelessly.

10 https://www.integramouse.com/en/home/.
11 http://www.terraeletronica.com.br/roller_mouse.htm.
12 http://cta.ifrs.edu.br/manuais/visualizar/55.
13 http://www.softmarket.com.br/?pgID=3&soft=897.
14 http://www.terraeletronica.com.br/bigballmousefdat.html.
15 https://www.ablenetinc.com/bigtrack-trackball-switch-adapted.
16 https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1120408.
17 https://www.pretorianuk.com/orbitrack.

M2TA - Mobile Mouse Touchscreen Accessible for Users with Motor Disabilities

277

The advantages of using smartphones for this purpose are mainly in the ease of move
because it is a small device and the possibility of use with only one hand. Also, they
have a great potential for connectivity (Wi-Fi, Bluetooth and Internet access), good
human-computer interface and with extensive popular use, being an excellent alternative
as remote controllers for the computer.

The Accurate Air Mouse (AAMouse) [14] tracks device movement in real-time,
allowing any mobile device with a microphone, such as a smartphone or a smartwatch,
to serve as a mouse controlling an electronic device with speakers. In this way, low
acoustic signals are emitted and the mobile device records and send to the emitter, which
can estimate the position of the device based on the Doppler eﬀect. Then the distance
between the loudspeakers and the starting position of the device is calculated based on
the sound frequency.

The SMTFController [15] describes how to turn smartphones into remote computer
controllers. It can be used in classrooms and meeting/conference rooms for presentation
and interactive discussion. It also allows users to use multiple smartphones to operate
the same computer, facilitating group discussion and classroom interaction.

Some researchers present methods to control the mouse from the computer through
real-time speech recognition using a smartphone [16]. The virtual mouse operation maps
spoken commands using the device’s microphone to the mouse computer movement
command. The purpose of this method is to control diﬀerent digital devices by voice.
The Tongue Drive System (TDS) [17] is a wireless wearable assistive technology that
allows people with severe disabilities to control their computers, wheelchairs and elec‐
tronic devices using the tongue movement. TDS translates the user’s language tracking
to drive commands that will be read by a bluetooth module and then embedded in the
smartphone. It can act as a mouse driver on other devices connected to the network with
the solution.

There is also a method for using the ﬁnger movements to interact with the smartphone
screen and to control the computer mouse. The application design resembles the track‐
ball and uses scanning techniques to improve the entry speed and to reduce the user’s
fatigue [18].

3 M2TA Solution

This research focuses on the development of one more mouse alternatives that allow
computer access by people with motor disabilities. It is a portable touchscreen version
of the conventional mouse. As seen in the related works section, researchers have already
proposed various hardware solutions as an alternative to the traditional mouse. In this
context, our research draws on these works by adopting metaphor input interfaces similar
to those input devices (e.g., RollerMouse, Touchpad, BJOY, and Button Mouse).

In our research the mobile device functions as a computer input device. The smart‐
phone or the tablet is the support for the execution of interfaces that simulate those input
device layouts. Thus, each user can choose the type of mouse that is best suited to their
needs and abilities [20]. Also, the user does not need to acquire new hardware devices,
which often is diﬃcult to maintain and expensive.

278

A. Rocha Façanha et al.

3.1 Architecture
The application architecture consists of a client (Android Application) that runs on the
user device and a server (Java Application) that runs on a computer. Client and server
communicate via wireless technology (i.e., Bluetooth or Wiﬁ). Thus, the server inter‐
prets the commands sent by the Android application and generates events as standard
mouse commands (Fig. 2).

Fig. 2. M2TA main components.

3.2 Mobile Application
The application interface adapts itself according to the screen size of the device. The
intention is to take advantage of the available space. The user can also switch to other
input interfaces in the settings options menu. We developed four kinds of input layouts:
M-Roller, Mjoy, M-Button, and MTouch. Figure 3 shows our proposal.

Fig. 3. M2TA layout interfaces

MTouch detects the movements and gestures of the user’s ﬁnger on the mobile
touchscreen. This Android application translates and transforms gestures to the cursor
movement on the computer, mirroring the user’s action on the computer display. For

M2TA - Mobile Mouse Touchscreen Accessible for Users with Motor Disabilities

279

instance, one-ﬁnger touch triggers the mouse click. Two-ﬁnger touch throws doubleclick 
on the computer. Three-ﬁnger touch is equivalent to a middle-click. Finally, a long
touch on the mobile screen means a right mouse click on the computer.

For the mini-joystick layout (Mjoy), the application does the translation of the torque
direction and force performed by the user. For this, we deﬁne a ratio of motion to the
cursor (1–100 pixels per movement). This design has the advantage of being as intuitive
and easy to learn as the touchpad.

The MRoller interface has only horizontal and vertical scrolling of the cursor. It also
oﬀers four distinct buttons with click functions (Table 1). Half-click and double-click
buttons are the most helpful for the user with motor disabilities.

Table 1. M2TA feature and corresponded computer event.

Action M2TA
Click (in Portuguese, “Clique”)
Right Click (in Portuguese, “Clique Botão
Direito”)
Double-Click (in Portuguese, “Duplo Clique”) Key for automatic double click
Half-Click (in Portuguese, “Meio Clique”)

Computer event
Function equal to the conventional mouse
Same as normal mouse function

Particular key for Drag & Drop function. Very
useful for people who can not hold and move
the directional roller at the same time

The M-Button layout is a “scan” mouse. It has four buttons to perform the cursor
movement - to the right, up, down, left. It also has four buttons with distinct click func‐
tions and a centralized button to conﬁgure the scan function. The scanning on this inter‐
face works by alternating between motion and function options, varying every 5 s. Once
the user has chosen one of the two options, he can switch between the four buttons every
5 s. For example, when starting MButton, the user chooses the group of directional
buttons he wants to interact. Then, the application waits for the user’s touch for ﬁve
seconds. If the user touches anywhere on the screen, then the computer move the mouse
cursor up. If not, the device waits another ﬁve seconds enabling the right arrow as the
standard touch.

Users can also use these distinct M2TA layouts with their feet if they have suﬃcient
motor control for the task. Our approach already reached the ﬁnal prototyping process.
Initial usability studies are in progress, some them are described in this paper.

The actions performed in the mobile application and sent to the server computer are:
(1) directional cursor movements controlled by the virtual buttons or the joystick; and
(2) mouse features represented by colored buttons (Table 1).

4

Initial Usability Evaluation

Four groups of specialists and two users with motor disabilities (in this case, cerebral
palsy) participated in the development process of M2TA. They interacted freely with
desktop applications using M2TA. Our goal was to seek for application’s errors and
receive suggestions for M2TA improvement. Besides, we observed their satisfaction,

280

A. Rocha Façanha et al.

comfort, and the resulting impacts in the computer access experience using M2TA solu‐
tions. The evaluation was exploratory and aimed at obtaining information of qualitative
nature, gathering the participants’ perceptions.

4.1 Participants
Expert  Users.  We  evaluated  the  proposed  technology  with  four  groups,  each  one
composed by two or more professionals. They are from well-established health and
education institutions  in South  America, such as: Instituto Teletón Chile (Assistive
Technology  Sector  -  Santiago  Unit),  SARAH  Network  of  Rehabilitation  Hospitals
(Bioengineering Sector - Brasília Unit - Brazil), Federal University of Ceará - Brazil
(Physiotherapy Course), and Estácio of Ceará University Center - Brazil (Physiotherapy
Course).
End Users.  We tested M2TA with two participants with cerebral palsy (1 male, 29
years old, graduated; and one female, 26 years old, artist). They volunteered to partici‐
pate in the tests. Both users had motor disabilities and they considered smartphones and
tablets as relevant devices for them to use. The inclusion criteria for participants with
disabilities included a self-reported diagnosis of disability, which in both users aﬀected
the upper limbs movement function. Also, they reported diﬃculties in using the standard
mouse. During the ﬁrst interactions, we observed mainly the users’ motor limitations
included a lower range of hand movement, diﬃculty in motor coordination and body
tremor.

4.2 Materials
During the evaluation sessions, the testers ran the M2TA on their own devices (mobile
device and computer). The objective was to maintain the users’ device preferences and
to observe the M2TA performance within a real context.

4.3 Procedure
We  conducted  sessions  involving  the  experts  at  their  respective  workplaces.  Each
session lasted up to 60 min and had four phases: (i) technology demonstration (10 min),
(ii) application usage (10 min), (iii) practices of SSPT (Single Switching Performance
Test) software18 (10 min), and feedback and discussion (30 min).

With motor impaired users, we applied a free exploration test. Initially, the test
observer  described  M2TA  and  installed  it  on  the  users’  devices.  After  that,  they
explained to the user the test purposes (i.e., to verify satisfaction, insights, and sugges‐
tions for improving M2TA). Each user was invited to use our approach freely (e.g.,
access a text editor, browse the Web). Additionally, we left a tablet with them during
one week to use M2TA in their houses. Finally, we conducted an unstructured interview
to get their feedback and insights (Fig. 4).

18 https://aacinstitute.org/sspt/.

M2TA - Mobile Mouse Touchscreen Accessible for Users with Motor Disabilities

281

Fig. 4. Session with an user with motor disabilities

4.4 Results
Observations and Suggestions Reported by the Experts.  Experts stated that M2TA
beneﬁts from the “enchantment” factor of smartphones and tablets. These devices are
far more seductive than non-digital hardware or other analogic assistive technology.
Also, they conﬁrmed that having layout options in the same software is very advanta‐
geous for this kind of users.

The experts considered the use of M2TA simple and without great cognitive eﬀorts
for their learning. They noticed users could touch on the desired feature directly. In fact,
touchscreen devices are valuable to people with low muscle strength, since these users
can interact with touchscreen devices without much eﬀort. One of the experts noted that
M2TA has  some features  similar  to  Augmentative  and  Alternative Communication
(AAC)19 tools. Although the central idea of M2TA is to replace the traditional mouse,
it also becomes useful to enhance communication of people with motor disabilities. In
fact, these people can use the M2TA independently, coupled to the communication
software installed on the computer.

Another highlight point is the low maintenance cost of M2TA when compared to
existing hardware solutions on the market. In fact, after some time of use, electrome‐
chanical materials began to get heavier. They need lubrication, and their extremities
started to show signs of corrosion, originating from hands/feet sweat and users’ saliva.
In contrast, M2TA is only dependent on the smartphone platform, which is easier to
replace and maintain.

As negative aspects, experts have reported the disadvantage of having two regions
of user’ visual focus (i.e., a user has to pay attention both the M2TA interface and the
computer screen). This can be challenging for some users. Although, some of them may
learn how to use M2TA without looking at the mobile interface over time. Experts have

19 AAC englobes communication methods used to enhance or replace speech or writing for people

with language impairments (e.g., the writing, speaking).

282

A. Rocha Façanha et al.

also indicated a possible fall risk of the device. In fact, interaction with the mobile device
may cause it to fall when it is placed on a non-ﬁxed surface. Another point to be studied
and  improved  is  the  button  sensitivity.  It  is  common  the  occurrence  of  accidental
touches, which activate unwanted functions as the devices screens are very sensitive.
We have accepted some of the experts’ suggestions for implementing a new version
of M2TA. For example, we standardised the colours of the various M2TA layouts to
make it more comfortable to use. Another potential use is the integration of M2TA with
games to improve the physical and cognitive skills of patients in rehabilitation. Another
suggestion was to combine M2TA with other assistive technologies, for example, wrist
weights. The goal is to help reducing the lack of motor coordination of the user. To do
this, we will need to carry out a more in-depth study with patients and rehabilitation
professionals.
End-User Feedback.  In general, the two users were able to complete their activities
on the computer (e.g., Web browsing, Facebook access, Text editing by using Windows
virtual keyboard, multimedia player control, click and drag games). In the beginning,
users needed the help of third parties to explain the M2TA operation. After that users
performed the tasks without problems.

Overall, users enjoyed the experience of using M2TA. They stated that the four entry
layouts in the same application is a great innovation. They were able to experiment all
input layouts, and, thus, choose the most appropriate support for controlling the mouse
cursor on the computer. The users considered that M2TA reduces the problem of access
and transportation of a assistive technology, device, once it is a mobile application. They
also stated that it made it possible to use our solution with their feet or even a little further
away from the computer due to wireless communication.

They emphasized that the size of the buttons is relatively large, which reduced errors
resulting from the interaction. Mistakes occurred, eventually, when they moved the
joystick or selected an unwanted button involuntarily (e.g., the scan button on the MButton 
interface). The researchers observed that the gap size between interface elements
did not impact users’ performance.

Regarding the MJoy interface, the two users commented on the lack of precision of
the  virtual  joystick.  They also mentioned  the  diﬃculties  in  controlling  the joystick
because, with the pressure exerted to manipulate it, the device moved over the screen.
In contrast, they had no problems with the return of tactile sensation. As an improvement,
one of the users suggested that the smartphones physical volume buttons could also
adjust the mouse speed control.

4.5 Discussion
In general, the evaluators, experts and end users, felt conﬁdent about using the M2TA
and its functions of pushing buttons and sliding the mouse cursor. They were able to
perform such interactions on the mobile device touchscreens. We observed that physical
and technical diﬀerences between mobile devices have impacts on the use of M2TA.
We realized that users have become more aware of their possibilities and limitations in

M2TA - Mobile Mouse Touchscreen Accessible for Users with Motor Disabilities

283

interacting with the computer. Also, the initial tests allowed us to establish the advan‐
tages and disadvantages of each of the proposed mouse layouts.

A future performance evaluation (e.g., time and accuracy) may point out to some
distinctions among each M2TA layout. However, such data alone should not be critical
to a user’s choice of mouse design. These measurements depend on the experience of
evaluators and the initial performance of their motor skills. For continuous and longterm 
use, users with motor impairments must choose the more appropriated assistive
technologies resource in conjunction with a team of experts.

The evaluators pointed out that the ﬁnancial cost of M2TA is not a signiﬁcant barrier
to its adoption since the average price of the mobile device is similar or lower than those
of several accessible mouses on the market. Besides, smartphones and tablets are general
purpose  devices,  and  users  can  beneﬁt  of  other  features  when  they  are  not  on  the
computer.

As a relevant result, we realize how people with motor disabilities interact with
touchscreens and how this can allow designers and engineers to improve the usability
of this type of interface.

Concerning the threats to validity, our initial analysis cannot yet be generalized, since
the number of users was limited. However, the results provided new ideas and sugges‐
tions that will allow the improvement of our approach. The study examined only the
interaction of users during the prototyping process of M2TA. This study also did not
measure the impact of additional and unwanted touches (i.e., a rate of unintentional
errors). In this sense, we need to implement more speciﬁc assessments of usability and
performance of M2TA.

Due to sampling limitations, the results do not provide a deﬁnitive interpretation of
the advantages and disadvantages of each M2TA mouse layout. Also, we can not say
that the M2TA outperforms other accessible mouses devices regarding their comfort
and input data rate.

5 M2TA Improvements

After this initial analysis we sought to use other haptic devices coupled to the mobile
device screens. We combine other models of joysticks with M2TA. A new feature adapts
the mobile application interface according to the place the user connects the physical
joystick on the screen. Figure 5 shows some of the new supported joysticks.

We began planning M2TA usability assessment sessions based on Fitts’s law [21] -
commonly referred as the paradigm in input device ergonomics. We have developed a
tracking application to facilitate the analysis of the interface versus mouse cursor path.
This will allow to identify which mouse layouts get the best performance results for each
evaluator. Figure 6 shows an example of the execution of the tracking software that we
developed. The evaluator has to select in the software ten objects of diﬀerent sizes that
appear in distinct positions on the screen. We deﬁne the distribution of points on display
based on the use of a Website.

284

A. Rocha Façanha et al.

Fig. 5. New supported joysticks

Fig. 6. Examples of track and logging developed for future evaluation sessions

Our tracking software represents a typical demand of those who interact with the
computer, that is, select objects in diﬀerent screen places by pointing and clicking. If
the participant hits the target correctly, the software provides positive visual feedback.
After that, it displays the next objective. If the click fails, the software also shows the

M2TA - Mobile Mouse Touchscreen Accessible for Users with Motor Disabilities

285

next point to be clicked on the screen. Timestamp, spatial information of cursor move‐
ments (x, y coordinates in pixels), and the button actions are recorded in a textual log.
In the end, the software generates an image with the cursor tracking lines traversed
during the navigation (Fig. 6).

6 Final Considerations and Future Work

The preliminary results obtained in this study suggest a high acceptance by the users
and experts in motor disabilities. The two users with motor disabilities indicated a good
satisfaction with the M2TA use and they presented an initial acceptable performance
for their routine adoption. They also have caveats and suggestions for improvements
that are in progress. Within this context, the proposed system is promising and still has
many features to improve.

Our ﬁrst future work is to implement the improvements highlighted using artiﬁcial
intelligence techniques to learn how to use the system. Also, we are planning a usability
assessment  with  a  signiﬁcative  number  of  participants.  The  goal  is  to  measure  the
performances of each layout and captures the new feedbacks and suggestions. For that,
we will use the tracking software showed in Sect. 5. The sessions will also use the SSPT
(Single Switching Performance Test) software.

In the long run, we plan to use M2TA in the rehabilitation of people with neuropsy‐
chomotor sequelae caused by TBI - Brain Injury and Stroke - Stroke. The idea is to
combine the M2TA with games that only use the mouse20.

Acknowledgements. This research is funded by Chilean FONDECYT #1150898; Basal Funds
for Centers of Excellence, Project FB0003 - CONICYT.

References

1. Hastings, S., et al.: Interviews and observation to investigate health eﬀects from using nonkeyboard 
input devices (NKID). In: Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics
Society Annual Meeting, vol. 44, no. 30. SAGE Publications, Los Angeles (2000)

2. Akamatsu, M., MacKenzie, I.S., Hasbroucq, T.: A comparison of tactile, auditory, and visual
feedback in a pointing task using a mouse-type device. Ergonomics 38(4), 816–827 (1995)
3. Atkinson, S., et al.: Using non-keyboard input devices: interviews with users in the workplace.

Int. J. Ind. Ergon. 33(6), 571–579 (2004)

4. Sutter,  C.,  Zieﬂe,  M.:  Interacting  with  notebook  input  devices:  an  analysis  of  motor

performance and users’ expertise. Hum. Fact. 47(1), 169–187 (2005)

5. Belatar,  M.,  Poirier,  F.:  Text  entry  for  mobile  devices  and  users  with  severe  motor
impairments: handiglyph, a primitive shapes based onscreen keyboard. In: Proceedings of
the  10th  International  ACM  SIGACCESS  Conference  on  Computers  and  Accessibility
(Assets  2008), 
(2008).  http://dx.doi.org/
10.1145/1414471.1414510

209–216.  ACM,  New  York 

pp. 

20 http://www.oneswitch.org.uk/art.php?id=28.

286

A. Rocha Façanha et al.

6. Shakespeare, T., Oﬃcer, A.: World report on disability. Disabil. Rehabil. 33(17–18), 1491

(2011)

7. Kaneko, S.T.: Computer mouse. USPatent D349, 280, 2 August 1994
8. Meriaz, R.: Trackball mouse. US PatentApp. 09/790,354.35, 22 August 2002
9. Cordes, S.A., Leach, D.C., Loussedes, D.A., Obszamy, C.E.: Joystick type computer input

device withmouse. US Patent 8,576,170.37, 5 November 2013

10. Basnett, R.J., Gregory, M.A., Cowell, S.L.: CRT lightpen interface for ﬂat panel displays.

US Patent 8,963,893.38, 24 February 2015

11. Gralewski,  W.A.,  Massaro,  K.L.,  On,  P.M.:  Touchpad  input  device.  US  Patent  App.

13/125,084.36, 11 August 2011

12. Dhingra, S., Entwisle, J., Lopez-Garcia, L., Center, U.W., Gilkison, S., Martin, J.K., Michels,
M., Shin, Y.J.: Current practices in maintenance and repair of mobility assistive technology
13. Section 508: Buy Accessible Technology. U.S. General Services Administration Federal
Government-wide Section508 Accessibility Program (2017). https://www.section508.gov/
content/buy. Accessed 12 Dec 2017

14. Yun, S., Chen, Y.-C., Qiu, L.: Turning a mobile device into a mouse in the air. In: Proceedings
of the 13th Annual International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and Services,
pp. 15–29. ACM (2015)

15. Yang, Y., Li, L.: Turn smartphones into computer remote controllers. Int. J. Comput. Theory

Eng. 4(4), 561 (2012)

16. Jang, T., et al.: Implementation of real-time vowel recognition mouse based on smartphone.

KIISE Trans. Comput. Pract. 21(8), 531–536 (2015)

17. Kim,  J.,  Park,  H.,  Ghovanloo,  M.:  Tongue-operated  assistive  technology  with  access  to
common  smartphone  applications  via  Bluetooth  link.  In:  2012  Annual  International
Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), pp. 4054–
4057. IEEE (2012)

18. Kim, C.G., Jang, U.H., Song, B.-S.: Development of a portable alternative computer access
APP for the physically disabled in Korea. In: Proceedings of the 7th International Convention
on  Rehabilitation  Engineering  and  Assistive  Technology  (i-CREATe  2013),  Singapore
Therapeutic, Assistive & Rehabilitative Technologies (START) Centre, Kaki Bukit TechPark
II, Singapore, 4 p. (2013). Article 18

19. Trewin, S., Swart, C., Pettick, D.: Physical accessibility of touchscreen smartphones. In:
Proceedings of the 15th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and
Accessibility (ASSETS 2013), 8 p. ACM, New York (2013). Article 19. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1145/2513383.2513446

20. Do Nascimento Maia, F., De Freitas, S.F.: Proposal of a ﬂowchart for the development process
of assistive technology products. Cadernos de Terapia Ocupacional da UFSCar, vol. 22, no.
3 (2014)

21. Soukoreﬀ,  R.W.,  Mackenzie,  I.S.:  Towards  a  standard  for  pointing  device  evaluation,
perspectives on 27 years of Fitts’ law research in HCI. Int. J. Hum.-Comput. Stud. 61(6),
751–789 (2004)

22. Trewin, S., Swart, C., Pettick, D.: Physical accessibility of touchscreen smartphones. In:
Proceedings of the 15th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and
Accessibility (ASSETS 2013), Article 19, 8 pages. ACM, New York (2013). http://dx.doi.org/
10.1145/2513383.2513446

