 

AudioGene: Mobile Learning Genetics 

through Audio by Blind Learners 

 

Jaime Sánchez and Fernando Aguayo 

Department of Computer Science, University of Chile 

Abstract.  Science  learning  is  a  complex  task  for  children  at  school  age, 
especially  for  blind  children.  The  purpose  of  this  study  was  to  develop  and 
evaluate AudioGene, a game that uses mobile and audio-based technology to 
assist  the  interaction  between  blind  and  sighted  children,  and  help  them  to 
learn biology and become more socially integrated. AudioGene was designed 
considering the communalities and specific particularities of the mental model 
of both blind and sighted users. The goals of this virtual environment were to 
integrate blind and sighted users, learn genetics concepts, and create ways of 
collaboration between them through the  use of mobile devices. The software 
usability  was  evaluated  and  the  results  show  that  audio-based  technology 
accompanied  with  ad-hoc  methodology  can  play  a  role  in  the  school 
integration  of  blind  users.  Relevant  gains  in  this  task  as  we  expect  from  the 
initial  results  of  this  pilot  study  could  reveal  that  mobile  gaming  can  be  a 
powerful tool for science learning of both blind and sighted students in school 
integrated learning settings. 

1  Introduction 

Science  teaching  and  learning  and  particularly  the  concepts  related  to  genetics 
are difficult to learn by the students due to the abstraction associated to the concepts 
involved  and  the  impossibility  of  doing  direct  observation  of  phenomena  and 
performing experiments to recreate similar environments.  

The use of mobile devices eliminates the barriers imposed by the interaction in a 
reduced  space  (and  not  always  available)  such  as  a  laboratory  and  allows  a  more 
fluid communication between the participants.  

Diverse authors have analyzed the impact of games on problem solving. Some of 
them  state  that  games  can  promote  higher  order  learning  skills,  such  as  increased 
meaningful dialogues among learners [1]. Other studies also describe positive effects 
of games on social skills [2].  

School  integration  and  social  inclusion  are  very  important  issues  nowadays  in 

Please use the following format when citing this chapter: 
 
Sánchez,  J.  and  Aguayo,  F.,  2008,  in  IFIP  International  Federation  for  Information  Processing,  Volume  281;  Learning  to  Live  in  the 
Knowledge Society; Michael Kendall and Brian Samways; (Boston: Springer), pp. 79–86. 

80 

Jaime Sánchez and Fernando Aguayo 

society and education. Several studies [3] to determine the role that technology can 
play in the school integration of users with disabilities into current classroom have 
been carried out. 

Some studies have used interactive games for assisting blind people for learning 
and  cognition  purposes.  AudioChile  and  AudioVida  [4]  are  audio-based  virtual 
environments oriented to enhance problem solving, navigation and orientation skills 
in users with visual disabilities.  

Eriksson & Gärdenfors [5] propose web-based games for children with different 
visual  impairments.  They  suggest  two  kinds  of  games:  image-based  games  for 
children with partial sight and sound-based games for completely blind children.  

Danesh  et  al.  propose  GeneyTM  [6],  a  collaborative  application  for  problem 
solving using genetics content through the use of PDAs oriented to sighted children 
and covering similar content of this study.  

In  the  work  exposed  by  de  Freitas  y  Levene  [7]  a  complete  analysis  of  the 
development  of  mobile  devices  for  education  is  presented.  Emphasis  is  made  on  a 
way  of  using  these  devices  for  helping  users  with  disabilities.  As  a  result,  they 
mention the benefits of new technologies in tasks such as locating places, help for 
mobility, and cognitive assistance for orientation in real environments.  

In this study we propose and evaluate AudioGene, a mobile sound-based virtual 
environment  for  science  learning  and  school  integration  of  legally  blind  children 
with sighted children. 

2  AudioGene 

The  metaphor  of  AudioGene  was  defined  as  a  virtual  gaming  world  including 
certain  genetics  concepts  such  as  DNA,  mutation,  genotype,  phenotype  and  gene. 
The contents were taken from the science school syllabus for 7th to 10th grade. The 
game was designed for mobile devices, in particular pocketPC devices, but allowing 
the  possibility  of  be  mapped  by  other  mobile  devices  that  have  Windows  as 
operating system.  

The  game  contains  different  interaction  zones  for  the  characters  controlled  by 
students, such as lava, water, mountain and earth (see Figure 1). The game presents a 
story that consists in a tree of life that has certain characteristics and is dying so the 
goal  is  to  replace  the  tree  by  another  one  with  the  same  characteristics  using  a 
combination of seeds that will result in a similar tree. 

 

Fig. 1. Virtual world of AudioGene displaying different interaction zones for the characters 
controlled by students, such as lava, water, mountain and earth. 

 

AudioGene: Mobile Learning Genetics through Audio by Blind Learners
 

81

In  order  to  achieve  the  goal  of  the  game  the  user  has  to  evolve  the  character 
chosen into superior entities. This allows the players to use the new acquired skills 
through  the  game  in  order  to  find  the  seeds  that  are  spread  throughout  the  virtual 
world. All new skills are gained during the acquisition of genetic knowledge through 
three ways: 1.The player travels through the world in a free way and interacts with 
the characters encountered; 2. The player solves a specific mission of the game, and 
3.  The  player,  in  conjunction  with  his  or  her  partners,  solves  the  mission.  The 
difference with the previous missions is that the other ones could be accomplished 
without the help of partners. 

The fact of working with a pocketPC device restricts the design of the graphic 
interface due to its size. To accomplish this, we avoided the use of buttons and status 
information.  Computer  controlled  characters  also  teach  the  users  about  contents 
concerning genetics through dialogs that are triggered as the user approaches them.  

The audio interface is composed by two types of sounds. The first one is used for 
spatial orientation and consists in using sound clues. The second one is for learning 
contents about genetics using pre-recorded sentences. 

These  sounds  may  correspond  to  the  area  where  the  user  is  located.  As  an 

example, when the user is over the water, an associated sound to water is played.  

In relation to the audio system, it is known that headsets only allow the use of 2 
sound  sources  (A  and  B  in  Figure  2,  left)  which  offer  the  option  of  3  spatial 
combinations.  The  first  two  combinations  correspond  to  only  one  of  the  sources 
being  used  (identified  as  left  or  right)  and  the  other  source  match  the  use  of  both 
sources  (which  is  intuitively  identified  as  front)  (see  Figure  2,  left).  The  proposed 
system consists in adding a new variable (C) to the sound system, which allows three 
new combinations and extend the spatial system to six combinations. When adding a 
rear sound to the user (C) we obtain a system like the one shown in Figure 2, right.  
 

Fig. 2. Audio system proposed for AudioGene using an audio mask in comparison with the 
stereo system. 

 

3  Research Methodology 

The methodology to evaluate the AudioGene consisted of two stages. In the first 
stage, the usability was evaluated with end users. All blind children that participated 
in the study were legally blind; this implies totally blind and children with residual 
vision.  In  the  second  stage,  the  work  dynamics  in  the  classroom  was  analyzed, 

82 

Jaime Sánchez and Fernando Aguayo 

considering aspects such as the motivation and the commitment of the students with 
this  new  way  to  learn  (around  a  mobile  game),  the  changes  in  the  conditions  of 
learning (interaction inside the classroom), and the results obtained in the cognitive 
development  and  specific  learning.  In  addition,  we studied  the  impact  of  using  the 
game in the school integration of blind children with their sighted classmates.  

3.1  Usability Evaluation 

Three different groups that interacted with AudioGene were formed. Each group 
was consisted of 1 legally blind child and 3 sighted children forming a sample of 3 
users  with  visual  disabilities  and  9  sighted  users.  The  legally  blind  users  were 
composed by 2 totally blind users and 1 user with residual vision with ages ranging 
from 8 to 12 years old. None of them had associated deficits. The sighted users had 
ages  ranging  from  8  to  14  years  old.  All  blind  users  participated  in  the  specific 
integration  program.  Two  facilitators  administered  the  tests  to  the  children.  The 
facilitators aside from orienting and helping children in the tasks also observed the 
behavior of the users when playing AudioGene. 

Two usability instruments were used during testing: (1) End-User Questionnaire 
[8], and (2) Open questionnaire. The End User Usability test was administered to the 
participants of the study. This was applied at the end of the usability sessions. It is 
basically a software acceptance test and consists of 18 sentences with an answered 
scale  of  10  points  (minimum  of  1  and  maximum  of  10).  The  Open  Questionnaire 
consisted of 5 open questions that helped to identify the level of integration the game 
can achieve. 

A facilitator provided a PocketPC to each user and gave them instructions for the 
task to be accomplished by playing the game as teamwork. Each team played during 
a session of 30 minutes with AudioGene solving collaborative tasks. In order to do 
this they had to coordinate themselves and define a strategy to attain the objective. 
Once the strategy was defined, students could play with AudioGene.  

After the end of the experience end user questionnaires were administered. Each 
usability  testing  consisted  of  the  following  steps:  introduction  to  the  software, 
software  interaction,  anecdotic  recording,  application  of  evaluation  instruments, 
session recording, session protocol reports, and software design and redesign. 

3.1.1  Results 

In  general,  the  game  was  highly  accepted  in  all  categories  for  blind  users 
(Satisfaction;  8.4  (out  of  10);  Control  and  Use:  9.2;  Sound:  8.9)  and  sighted  users 
(Satisfaction;  8.3;  Control  and  Use:  8.8;  Sound:  8.6;  Image:  9.3).  There  were  not 
critical differences between sighted users (see Figure 3) and blind users 

From  the  “Game  Satisfaction”  category  the  assertions  that  obtained  the  highest 
scores in both blind and sighted users corresponded to “I would play again with the 
software” (9.3 and 9.7 respectively) and “The software is entertaining” (10 and 9.8 
respectively).  The  asseveration  “The  software  has  different  levels  of  difficulty” 
obtained the lowest score, 5.7 for blind users and 6.3 for sighted users, which reveals 
that this was the task with increasing level of difficulty while users solved tasks. In 
the “Game Control and Usage” category, the assertion that obtained the highest score 

AudioGene: Mobile Learning Genetics through Audio by Blind Learners
 

83

in both type of users was “The software is easy to use” (10 for blind users and 9.4 for 
sighted  users).  This  result  denotes  the  easiness  of  use  achieved  by  the  proposed 
interface of AudioGene.  

The  assertion  “The  sounds  used  in  the  software  conveys  me  information” 
obtained the highest score from blind children, 9.7, and 7.3 for sighted users. This 
reveals the adequate selection of sound made for the game because they were useful 
for them to solve the tasks assigned. 

 

Fig. 3. Results of the usability evaluation of AudioGene. 

 

Learners commented that sounds were identifiable, high-quality and clear. They 
emphasized the fact that AudioGene let them work together, fully interact, and solve 
tasks  collaboratively  between  blind  and  sighted  children.  They  showed  a  high 
interest  in  the  fact  that  characters  were  able  to  win  skills  and  solve  tasks  in 
connection with these skills. A sighted student value the game because “It made me 
work together with my blind partners”. 

In general, the answers obtained support the goal of the game for learning (the 
game is useful “to interact with my friends and learn”), and in some specific cases 
science learning (the game is useful “to learn things about science”).  

The  users  were  motivated  in  the  fact  that  by  using  the  new  skills  provided  by 
AudioGene they can solve different group tasks. For the question, what did you like 
in the software? A sighted child answered: “it is entertaining, interactive and we can 
learn  more.  I  was  very  entertained  because  I  had  a  mission  with  my  partners” 
Another  child  said:  “I  liked  to  obtain  powers  (skills)  because  the  questions  were 
difficult  and  it  was  like  a  challenge”.  A  blind  child  commented:  “I  liked  the  lava 
because all of my partners entered to it and we all together could cross it” 

3.2  Learning and Social Integration Evaluation 

The sample consisted of 5 legally blind children and 3 sighted children. These 8 
students were distributed in two groups of 4 children each. Each of these groups was 
conformed by one blind user and 3 sighted users.  

From the blind children, 2 were totally blind and 3 had residual vision. Four of 
the  children  assist  to  the  “La  Maisonette”  school  that  currently  implement  an 
integration  program  and  the  other  four  children  assist  to  the  “Escuela  de  Ciegos 
Santa Lucía”, school specialized in blind students (see Figure 4). Both schools are 

84 

Jaime Sánchez and Fernando Aguayo 

located in Santiago de Chile. Two facilitators participated in the evaluations; both of 
them were special education teachers specialized in vision disabilities. 

In order to know what do children thought about the whole experience working 
with AudioGene, a short open questionnaire was used. This questionnaire consisted 
of  questions  such  as,  “How  do  you  regularly  play  with  your  partners?”,  “What  do 
you think about AudioGene?”, “What do you think about this new way of learning?”, 
and “Would you like to have more games like this one?” 

 

Fig.  4.  Children  playing  AudioGene.  (A)  “La  Maissonette”  school  students  (B)  “Escuela  de 
Ciegos Santa Lucía” students.  

 

We wanted to know the novelty that a serious game like AudioGene can provide 
to  children  interaction  and  integration.  The  other  questions  focused  on  finding 
answers in the field of social integration and learning. 

With  the  purpose  of  carrying  out  this  research  the  following  stages  were 
followed:  1.  Introduction  to  the  game;  2.  Collaborative  gaming  with  AudioGene 
during  a  session  of  30  minutes;  and  3.  Application  of  the  open  questionnaire.  All 
evaluations were carried out in the schools. 

3.2.1  Results 

Some  interesting  answers  from  the  children  describe  how  they  regularly  play 
with  other  children.  For  example,  when  playing  soccer,  they  put  the  ball  inside 
plastic  bags  in  order  to  hear  sounds  when  the  ball  is  moving.  Thanks  to  these 
particular  sounds  children  with  visual  disabilities  are  able  to  follow  the  ball 
movements and play soccer without problems. Most of them mentioned that they do 
not have common games to play between sighted and blind children. 

All  of  them  found  that  AudioGene  was  entertaining  and  motivating.  They 
focused  mainly  in  the  possibility  of  accomplishing  tasks  in  conjunction  with  their 
partners. Sighted children liked to be able to play with their blind partners. For blind 
children the fact of being able to work in conjunction with sighted children through 
the  use  of  technology  was  a  very  good  experience  and  they  liked  to  be  one of  the 
participants of the teamwork. 

For the question, did you like to play with your friend? All teams agreed that to 
play  all  together  was  a  very  good  experience.  All  of  them  could  participate  and 
achieve  the  proposed  objective  as  a  team  and  also  having  individual  tasks  and 
responsibilities.   

Children  found  that  learning  with  a  mobile  game  was  more  entertaining  than 
reading  books  and  also  more  motivating.  Even  a  blind  girl  added  “I  am  going  to 
propose it to the Madame…(her teacher)”.  

They pointed that one of the advantages of AudioGene was that they can be all 

AudioGene: Mobile Learning Genetics through Audio by Blind Learners
 

85

together in teams interacting, playing and learning. An integrated blind girl states: “(I 
found it) good, because all of us can be there and is entertaining to play with it. In 
the  way  that  it  teaches  that  all  the  people  in  the  world  are  different;  there  is  no 
person similar to another. Some can cross the lava, another one can cross the water 
but the ones that can cross the lava cannot cross the water…” The idea behind this 
answer is that the metaphor used in the game teaches her that all people are different 
with different skills and virtues. One of the children supports the idea of creating and 
having  more  games  for  school  integration  and  concludes  “…  we  cannot  live  in  a 
world  where  all  is  made  for  the  people  that  are  sighted  or  in  a  world  where  the 
sighted are separated from the blind” 

About the question, would you play again AudioGene? All the children answered 

affirmatively to this question.  

All  of  these  answers  inject  motivation  and  ideas  to  continue  working  with  this 
gaming tool and test its capabilities for learning biology concepts more fully in the 
near future.  

4  Discussion 

The purpose of this study was to develop and evaluate AudioGene, a game that 
uses mobile technology to promote interaction between blind and sighted children, 
social integration and in doing so, to learn science. We think that it is important to 
generate  school  spots  where  blind  children  feel  motivated  for  learning  and 
constructing  knowledge.  In  this  direction,  new  technologies  can  help  immensely 
especially for communication and collaboration between sighted and blind children.  
This  new  way  of  learning  around  a  mobile  game  specially  tailored  to  blind 
children, helps to improve the accessibility of all users to technology-based learning 
materials and thus improve their learning. Applications such as AudioGene open the 
possibility of creating more inclusive learning contexts where sighted users and users 
with  visual  disabilities  can  work  together  collaboratively  and  achieve  common 
objectives.  

The experience presented by Freitas y Levene [7] can be complemented with the 
results  presented  in  this  work.  The  use  of  mobile  devices  not  only  can  assist  the 
learning  of  legally  blind  users,  but  also  by  embedding  applications  such  as 
AudioGene, can become powerful tools for school integration and social inclusion.  

The positive effects of games on social skills mentioned by Pellegrini et al. [2] is 
corroborated in this work because the use of AudioGene allowed blind children to be 
socially  integrated  with  their  sighted  partners,  participating  actively  in  social 
activities,  and  showing  high  interest  and  motivation  for  learning  by  using  mobile 
gaming. From the comments made by the children we highlight the fact that the use 
of  the  game  allowed  legally  blind  children  to  work  integrated  with  sighted 
classmates, feeling themselves as taking advantage of the school life. This result is 
very relevant to achieve a more complete learning beyond contents. 

The fact that AudioGene is a mobile application allows the children to play inside 
and outside of their classrooms and learn more naturally in other nit fully explored 
learning contexts with the assistance of technology. 

The remaining work in this study is to identify whether the biological concepts 

86 

Jaime Sánchez and Fernando Aguayo 

embedded  in  the game  are  fully  learned by  the  students,  both by  constructing new 
knowledge  and  complementing  the  knowledge  learned  in  their  regular  classes.  In 
addition, we should identify whether the virtual world provided by the game has to 
be  extended  to  generate  more  degrees  of  difficulty  in  the  learning  tasks  to  be 
accomplished.  We  have  to  identify  in  a  deeper  way  the  degree  of  students’ 
integration  that  can  be  achieved  with  AudioGene.  Finally,  testing  the  use  of 
AudioGene  in  environments  outside  the  classroom,  like  a  museum,  could  be  a 
challenging task in searching for innovative ways learning science. 

Acknowledgements 

This  report  was  funded  by  the  Chilean  National  Fund  of  Science  and 

Technology, Fondecyt, Project 1060797. 

References 

1.  K. McDonald and R. Hannafin, Using web-based computer games to meet 
the  demands  of  today’s  high  stakes  testing:  A  mixed  method  inquiry. 
Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 2003, 55(4), pp. 459–472 
2.  A.  Pellegrini,  P.  Blatchford  and  B.  Kentaro,  A  Short-term  Longitudinal 
Study of Children’s Playground Games in Primary School: Implications for 
Adjustment  to  School  and  Social  Adjustment  in  the  USA  and  the  UK. 
Social Development, 2004 13(1), pp. 107–123 

3.  E.  Feyerer,  K.  Miesenberger  and  D.  Wohlhart,  ICT  and  Assistive 
Technology in Teachers Education and Training. Computer Helping People 
with Special Needs: Proceedings of 8th International Conference, ICCHP 
2002, Linz, Austria, July 15-20, 2002, pp. 297-334 
J.  Sánchez,  and  M.  Sáenz,  3D  sound  interactive  environments  for  blind 
children  problem  solving  skills.  Behaviour  &  Information  Technology, 
Vol. 25, No. 4, July – August 2006, pp. 367 – 378. 

4. 

5.  Y.  Eriksson  and  D.  Gärdenfors,  Computer  games  for  children  with  visual 
impairments. Proceedings of the 5th International conference on Disability, 
Virtual Reality and Associated Technologies, 20-22 September, 2004, New 
College, Oxford, UK, pp. 79-86. 

6.  A.  Danesh  and  K.M.  Inkpen,  F.  Lau,  K.  Shu  and  K.S.  Booth,  GeneyTM: 
designing  a  collaborative  activity  for  the  palm  handheld  computer.  In 
Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI 2001), Seattle, USA, pp. 388–395. 

7.  S.  de  Freitas  and  M.  Levene,  Evaluating  the  development  of  wearable 
devices,  personal  data  assistants  and  the  use  of  other  mobile  devices  in 
further and higher education institutions. JISC Technol. and Stand. Watch 
Report: Wearable Technology, 2003, TSW 03-05, pp. 1-21 
J.  Sánchez,  End-user  and  facilitator  questionnaire  for  Software  Usability.  
Usability evaluation test. University of Chile, 2003. 

8. 

