 

Touchscreen Mobile Phones Virtual Keyboarding   

for People with Visual Disabilities 

Agebson Rocha Façanha1, Windson Viana2, Mauro Cavalcante Pequeno2,   

Márcia de Borba Campos3, and Jaime Sánchez4 

1 Instituto Federal de Educação, Ciência e Tecnologia do Ceará, Brasil 

agebson@ifce.edu.br 

2 Universidade Federal do Ceará, Brasil 

{windson,mauro}@virtual.ufc.br 

3 Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul, Brasil 

marcia.campos@pucrs.br 

4 Universidad de Chile, Chile 

jsanchez@dcc.uchile.cl 

Abstract.  This  paper  presents  the  design  and  initial  evaluation  of  a  Braille   
virtual  keyboard  which  allows  text  input  on  touchscreen  devices  such  as   
smartphones and tablets. The virtual keyboard, called LêBraille, is a metaphor 
of the Braille writing system that uses audio and vibration feedbacks to promote 
accessibility for people with visual disabilities. We integrated this keyboard into 
two  mobile  applications  and  implemented  an  initial  usability  evaluation  with 
nine  people  with  visual  disabilities.    The  evaluation  comprised  activities  including 
 a  comparison  of  text  input  in  three  types  of  keyboards  (physical   
keyboard,  alpha  numeric  virtual  keyboard,  and  LêBraille).  Initial  results   
indicates that writing activities can be as fast as a virtual keyboard depending 
on  the  Braille  expertise  of  the  user  and  the  degree  of  blindness,  however,   
the writing pace with a virtual keyboard is lower than the writing pace with a 
physical keyboard. 

Keywords: Accessibility, Mobile Computing, and Braille. 

1 

Introduction 

Touchscreen  interfaces  on  smartphones  and  tablets  have  brought  a  new  interaction 
challenge for users with visual disabilities [9,11]. After all, these devices have a glassy 
 surface  with  several  visual  elements  accessed  through  capturing  the  movements 
and gestures on the screen. Also, these interfaces have fewer points of reference and 
low  tactile  feedback  to  guide  the  interaction.  Third-party  applications  developed   
for  these  platforms  are  more  demanding  from  a  visual  perspective;  they  are  based   
on  gesture  navigation  and  possess  an  adaptive  layout,  which  changes  the  interface 
according  to  the  device  position  (i.e.,  device  screen  rotation).  In  addition,  physical 
keyboards are replaced by virtual versions. These characteristics make the interaction 
with these devices more complex for people with visual disabilities and often require 
strong  cognitive  efforts  from  them,  such  as  the  memorization  of  the  positions  of   

M. Kurosu (Ed.): Human-Computer Interaction, Part III, HCII 2014, LNCS 8512, pp. 134–145, 2014. 
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014 

  Touchscreen Mobile Phones Virtual Keyboarding for People with Visual Disabilities 

135 

virtual keyboard keys [9,10,11,12]. Therefore, there is a growing demand for visual 
accessibility of  these devices, since people  with visual disabilities claim  for adaptations 
that allow them to have access to such technological innovations [10,12]. 

A very well-known layout by people with visual disabilities is that of the six cells 
in the Braille system. Braille is one of the main resources available for communication 
and social inclusion for people with disabilities into society. However, it is noted 
that currently there is a trend towards less use of Braille in digital technologies, when 
compared with the use of haptics and sound technologies 1.   

In this context, our research is focused on the design of a software application, the 
LêBraille  virtual  keyboard,  which  allows  writing  on  touchscreen  devices  using  a 
Braille metaphor. We aimed at examining this layout as alternative for QWERTY and 
Perkins  based  keyboards  [14],  and  also  to  promote  a  much  wider  use  of  Braille  in 
digital technologies. In this paper, in particular,  we present the design and development 
 of  the  LêBraille  virtual  keyboard,  its  integration  into  two  mobile  applications 
(SMS  and  Twitter  clients),  and  an  initial  usability  evaluation  with  nine  users  with 
visual disabilities. The final version of the LêBraille virtual keyboard and its evaluation 
are the main contribution of this paper.   

The  remainder  of  this  paper  is  organized  as  follows:  Section  2  presents  related 
work on text input on mobile devices. The LêBraille Virtual keyboard, and its design 
and development processes are described in Section 3. Section 4 presents the usability 
evaluation  of  the  mobile  applications.  Finally,  we  conclude  the  paper  with  final   
considerations and future work in Section 5. 

2 

Related Work 

Research on the development of assistive technologies for mobile devices is relatively 
recent.  In  fact,  the  presence  of  audio,  communication,  and  sensor  features  on  these 
mobile devices offer a unique and personal platform to the development of new services 
(e.g., entertainment, navigation, and communication) aimed at people with visual 
disabilities which have attracted the attention of many researchers [1,8].   

The challenge of text input on such devices  has been one of the research objects 
[1,9].  Examples  of  such  researches  are:  Eyes-Free  Text  Entry  [9],  NavTouch  [11], 
No-Look Notes [10], NavTilt [12], BrailleType [1], BrailleTouch [14], Mobile Messenger 
for the Blind [8], and TypeInBraille [15].   

NavTouch  [11],  NavTilt  [12],  and  BrailleType  [1]  have  been  developed  by  researchers 
at the University of Lisbon, Portugal. NavTouch, for example, is software 
used for text entry that interacts with the user through directional movements (right, 
left, up and down) and sound features. NavTilt differs from traditional approaches of 
text  input  based  multitapping  by  having  a  gesture-based  3D  interaction  and  a  new 
organization of the alphabet; the aim is to allow text input using only one hand. BrailleType 
 is  an  evolution  of  these  previous  experiences.  It  proposes  a  method  of  text 
input  through  the  touch-based  graphical  representation  of  the  Braille  alphabet.  The 
system was developed for Android in which the letters are encoded in a matrix of six 
points with audible feedback through the SVOX voice synthesizer. 

In  our  approach,  we  propose  to  reuse  the  well-known  layout  of  six  cells  of  the 
Braille  system.  Eyes-free  [9]  NavTouch  [11],  No-Look  Notes  [10],  NavTilt  [12], 

 

136 

A.R. Façanha et al. 

however,  they  are  applications  more  centered  on  the  production  of  new  keyboard 
layouts. In fact, our proposal for text input resembles in some principles to the project 
BrailleType 1,  which  was designed concurrently  with our  project. We use the same 
keyboard  metaphor,  both  applications  execute  on  Android  platform,  and  our  target 
device is the smartphone. In this paper, we go one step further by including the development 
of two applications that promote the use of our Braille-based keyboard.   

3 

The LÊBRAILLE Virtual Keyboard 

LêBraille is a mobile service for the Android platform that aims to include the use of 
Braille on new technologies. It uses gestures on the screen, gestures using the device, 
audio feedback, and nuances of Braille to facilitate text input on touchscreen devices. 
Besides to propose an alternative data entry on touchscreen devices,  we expect that 
our  research  can  also  be  used  for  practical  training  of  the  Braille  alphabet.  For  the 
development of the virtual keyboard and the mobile applications  we adopted an extension 
of the co-design methodology proposed by Millard et al. [13]. This methodology 
integrates techniques of software engineering, agile development methodologies, 
and methods for the design of graphical user interfaces in order to compose an iterative 
development process. Fig. 1.    illustrates the general stages of the methodology. 
We decided to adopt a development in three sprints described below. 

Fig. 1. Sprint-based process for the development of our approach 

 

The  first  stages  of  the  methodology  include  the  study  and  design  of  applications 
made during the discussion meetings with a small group of users. These early stages 
were included in the first two sprints. At first, we held storyboarding meetings with 
three developers on mobile systems, which had notions of accessibility, and two persons 
who are blind1. The main objective was to understand the needs and expectations 
in the interaction with these interfaces. Based on these observations, we developed a 

                                                           
1  They were two men, one aged 25 and another aged 43. Both were blind from birth, possess 
advanced knowledge on Braille, intermediate knowledge on computers, and had little or no 
experience in the use of touchscreen interfaces. 

 

  Touchscreen Mobile Phones Virtual Keyboarding for People with Visual Disabilities 

137 

low-fidelity prototype virtual keyboard based on the Braille System. During the meeting,
 a discussion on the choice of prototype platform was initiated. We opted for the 
Android platform, since it is a more open platform, despite being, at that time, a fledgling 
operating system regarding accessibility compared to Apple's iOS. 

Following the methodology mentioned, we developed a high-fidelity prototype of 
the virtual keyboard. We conducted a brainstorming process with a group of 5 people 
with  visual  disabilities,  who  had  heterogeneous  profiles  (knowledge  of  Braille,  age, 
gender). This experience was important for structuring the research and allowed for a 
better definition of the scope and the limitations of the study. This very preliminary 
research pilot study including practical activities is reported in a previous study [2].   

Taking  this  initial  evaluation  and  considering  other  experiments  described  in  the   
literature  [3,4,5,8],  we  have  identified  some  key  requirements  to  improve  visual   
accessibility  in  applications  that  run  on  touchscreen  devices  [1].  Some  of  these  requirements 
were applied in the design of mobile applications in this study, such as: 
•  Always provide feedback for all actions in the interaction elements. 
•  Preferably,  use  motion-based  interaction,  because  the  actions  performed  through 

gestures reduce the barriers imposed by the interface. 

•  When using the interaction elements, the application  must include an exploration 
mode of the screen, since the interaction elements  must be identifiable  with both 
tactile and audio feedbacks. 

•  The  elements  of  interaction  including  the  interfaces  should  be  presented  in  a  list 
layout or in a two columns layout, avoiding table layouts. Then, the device sides 
can be used as reference points. 

•  Alert messages and pop-ups must fulfill the entire screen with options to exit and 

return to the previous screen. 

•  Use  of  timeout  in  an  element  selection  should  be  avoided.  It  can  confuse  users, 

especially novice users who need more time to interact with the application. 

•  If it is not possible to design an interface adapted to the screen rotation, it is better 

to set a layout orientation (preferably vertical, top to bottom). 

•  The use of colors that provide a minimum contrast between background and foreground 
is required. 

Based on the requirements to improve visual accessibility  and the feedback from 
the usability of the initial experiment [2], we redesigned a more complete version of 
the virtual keyboard LêBraille. The virtual keyboard LêBraille was based on the operation 
of the Braille system. The arrangement of interface elements follows the structure 
of a Braille cell; the buttons correspond to the formation of Braille points. Once 
touched, the device emits a sound corresponding to the selected cell. 

During  the  interface  design,  we  chose  to  merge  the  use  of  buttons  and  gestures. 
Thus, the system can be used by people who are blind, by people with low vision, and 
sighted  people  that  understand  the  Braille  system.  The  keyboard  LêBraille  interacts 
with  speech  synthesis  software  configured  as  standard  on  the  mobile  device  (e.g., 
Pico, SVOX, eSpeak). For this study, we used a native function of the Android platform 
 (android.speech.tts.TextToSpeech). The  language  used  by  the  TTS  software  is 
automatically configured by device operational system. LêBraille can be invoked by 
any other text application using inter-process communication based on Intents. Fig. 2 
presents an overview of the system commands. 

 

138 

A.R. Façanha et al. 

Fig. 2. LêBraille commands and recognized gestures 

 

We developed two  mobile applications to encourage  interaction and communication 
between people with visual disabilities through services that provide the tasks of 
sending  and  receiving  messages.  These  applications  offer  access  to  the  social  networking 
 platform  Twitter  (LêBrailleTWT)  and  to  the  SMS  messaging  service 
(LêBrailleSMS).  Both  applications  use  the  virtual  keyboard  LêBraille  to  allow  for 
writing  messages  on  a  touchscreen  device.  The  mobile  applications  developed  are 
illustrated in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4. They have universal design of their graphic interfaces. 
Thus, non-blind people (e.g., special education teachers) can also practice the Braille 
by using text-based communication services provided by these applications. 
 

Fig. 3. Twitter mobile client screenshots 

 

 

  Touchscreen Mobile Phones 

Virtual Keyboarding for People with Visual Disabilities 

139 

F
Fig. 4. SMS mobile client screenshots 

 

Both  applications  acces
They also communicate wit
functions. For example, LêB
Service in order to make co
and tweet a message). LêB
sages via the Android SDK
phone number and maintai
using Braille. LêBrailleSM
accessible  way,  having  a  s
similar  to  LêBrailleTWT  a
is available in http://www.y
is reading his Tweets and is
writes the phrase "Web Acc

ss  the  device  accelerometer  to  recognize  some  gestu
th the Internet and the mobile phone network to perform
BrailleTWT performs a REST request to the Twitter W
ommunication (e.g., list and read the 20 most recent po
railleSMS, in turn, invokes a method of sending text m
K. The virtual keyboard is also used to enter the recipien
n the same interface, since it is possible to enter numb
MS provides both the sending and receiving messages in
structure  comprising  navigability,  gestures  and  comma
application.  A  video  illustrating  the  use  of  LêBrailleTW
youtube.com/watch?v=IY8cgd-jh8g. It shows one user t
s writing a message with the LêBraille virtual keyboard.
cessibility" in Portuguese. 

ures. 
m its 
Webosts 

mes-
nts’ 
bers 
n an 
ands 
WT   
that 
 He 

4 

Usability Evalua

ation 

After  designing  and  develo
performed and also the spee

oping  the  mobile  applications,  a  usability  evaluation  w
ed of writing using LêBraille was measured.   

was 

4.1 

Sample 

For the usability evaluation
obtain an initial validation o
different sessions were imp
the Twitter client and the w
interface for sending and re
iv) a comparative writing te
Each session had an ave
period  from  March  2012  to
for  convenience  according 
years, with prior knowledg
each participant is shown in
                                            
2    Focal  group  methodology 
given the perceptions repor

n, we use the  focus  groups  methodology,2  [6], in orde
of the mobile systems with a test group of nine users. F
plemented: i) a test knowledge of Braille, ii) an analysis
writing speed of the virtual keyboard, iii) an analysis of 
eceiving SMS messages from the application, and fina
est with other types of keyboards.   
erage duration of two hours. The sessions were held in 
o April  2013. The  sample  was  non-probabilistic,  selec
to  [7].  Users  with  visual  disabilities  were  older  than
e of Braille and computer practice. The detailed profile
n Table 1. 
               
is  sampling  process  that  seeks  to  obtain  qualitative  informa
rted by participants during discussion meetings. 

ation 

r to 
Four 
s of 
f the 
ally, 

the 
cted 
n  18 
e of 

 

140 

A.R. Façanha et al. 

Table 1. Profile of the users sample for the usability evaluation   

 

4.2  Materials 

We  developed  wood  model  prototypes  that  simulate  some  interfaces  of  the  mobile 
applications. The goal  was to familiarize users  with the systems layout, through the 
appropriation  of  their  repertoire  of  commands,  gestures  and  actions.  A  wood  prototype 
example is illustrated in Fig. 5. During the experiments with LêBraille we used a 
Galaxy 5 I5500B device including a 2.8 inch screen and the Android 2.2 system.   
 

 

Fig. 5. Sensorial experimentation with wood prototype models of the virtual keyboard 

The session aiming to compare speed of writing was implemented with a Nokia E5 
device  and  the  Galaxy  5  I5500B  device.  Nokia  E5  possesses  a  physical  QWERTY 
keyboard.  A  virtual  QWERTY  keyboard  with  audio  feedback  was  installed  on  the 
Android device since we were unable to use the default virtual keyboard of the platform.
 All sections were recorded by videotaping and at end of each session we asked 
users to fill out a questionnaire. 

4.3 

Instruments 

A questionnaire was administered in order to discover, analyze and validate, through 
observations of the  user group, requirements for improving the  mobile applications. 
The questionnaire was created guided by the following metrics: 

I. Organization and Presentation. Indicate levels of user´s acceptance. This is determined 
by the way of presenting the technology being tested. Therefore, involves the 
overall organization, structure, presentation strategy, consistency and completeness. 
II.  Motivation.    Measures  the  ability  of  technology  to  impact,  motivate  and  arouse 
interest. It is also related to user´s acceptance 
III. Design.    Measures the quality of the design presented in the application interface. 

 

  Touchscreen Mobile Phones Virtual Keyboarding for People with Visual Disabilities 

141 

IV. Audio Style. Refers to the understanding, quality, and style of the audio provided 
by the application. 
V. Navigation. Measures the easiness of the user in browsing pages and its content. 
VI. Content. Relates to the subject matter covered by the technology being tested. 
VII. Speed. Determines the speed of access to the page or application contents. 
VIII. Objectives. Quantifies if the approach achieves its purposes and goals. 
IX. Special Education. Measures whether the technology can be applied in the education 
of people with visual disabilities. 

4.4 

Procedure 

Before the initial interaction with the mobile applications users had undergone practical 
 tests  to  prove  their  skills  with  the  Braille  system.  They  transcribed  the  same 
phrases used during testing with the mobile applications. The time for writing these 
phrases was measured. During session II and III three activities were proposed with 
increasing levels of difficulty. They aim to achieve better quantitative results of validation 
and acceptance of the virtual keyboard and mobile applications. 

For activity I, we asked users to navigate in the Twitter client application, to read 
tweets and re-send some tweets (retweet). Then, a practical challenge  was proposed 
for  each  participant.  The  challenge  was  to  tweet  the  complete  alphabet  through  the 
text input interface. The goal of this challenge was to evaluate the writing pace using 
LêBraille which so far had not been evaluated by Braille literate users. 

Activity II was to post a message to Twitter. This message followed the reports of 
Socialmediatoday3, which cite the average words per tweet. Thus, we proposed writing 
(via LêBrailleTWT) a proverb4  that fits the specifications  mentioned. Each user 
had a time period to conduct a random posting to remember the steps of submission. 
After this time, the activity began.One of the objectives of the activity II was to evaluate 
the average writing time with the virtual keyboard LêBraille. In the fourth section,
 we asked users to write the same sentence of the activity II using two other types 
of keyboards: a QWERTY virtual keyboard and a physical QWERTY keyboard. The 
comparative results of these interactions are described in the next section. Activity III 
consisted in sending a SMS (via LêBrailleSMS). The user could select the message, 
but it should contain at least 10 words and the last word should be the user name as 
message  identification.  This  message  was  sent  to  the  mobile  phone  number  of  one 
researcher. The  main objective of this activity  was  to obtain qualitative  information 
from the perceptions reported by participants during the performance tests using the 
SMS application. 

4.5  Results 

Graphic  1  shows  the  results  of  the  writing  challenge  in  the  activity  I.  The  graphic 
presents the time results of each participant to conclude the challenge using LêBraille, 
slate  and  stylus.  When  using  LêBraille,  the  average  time  to  writing  and  posting  of 
                                                           
3  Socialmediatoday.com/joshgordon/253668/ 
  content-marketing-lessons-top-10-retweets-2010 
4  "Antes de dar comida a um mendigo, da a ele uma vara e o ensina a pescar". 

 

142 

A.R. Façanha et al. 

messages was 05 min and 2
ison with the writing time u
the two approaches, which 
of  experience  of  the  user  w
interfaces to write text. Som
user 4 that has low vision an

23 sec. The coefficient of variation was 39.26. The comp
using the slate and stylus indicate speed difference betw
may be explained by navigational difficulties due to l
with  the  application  and  the  challenge  to  use  touchscr
me users showed better results (3 min and 20 s), such as 
nd users 5 and 6 that had advanced skills on Braille.   

parween 

lack 
reen 
the 

Graphic 1. Time for wr

riting the alphabet using LêBraille with the slate and stylus 

 

Graphic 2. T

Time to writing the proverb on the four systems 

 

Graphic 2 illustrate the wri
Braille, LêBraille, a QWER
The average time for writin
and 36 sec and the coeffici
time. Regarding the compa
performance of  data  input 
with physical buttons. Even
performance compared to th
of computers as a means of 
Of the nine users who c
mances  using  the  LêBrail
although  trying  for  three  t

iting time of the proverb on the four systems experiment
RTY virtual keyboard, and a QWERTY physical keyboa
ng and posting on Twitter with LêBrailleTWT was 11 m
ient of variation was 33.99. This suggests a relatively h
arison between the writing approaches, it is clear the be
using  physical  returns as Braille  and  QWERTY  keybo
n for some users using the physical keyboard had a be
he use of Braille. This makes us believe the increasing 
communication to the detriment of Braille.   
conducted the experiment, three of them had better perf
lle  than  using  the  QWERTY  virtual  keyboard.  User
times  on  different  days,  could  not  finalize  the  propo

ted: 
ard. 
min 
high 
etter 
oard 
etter 
use 

forr 
 2,   
osed   

 

  Touchscreen Mobile Phones 

Virtual Keyboarding for People with Visual Disabilities 

143 

activity  with  the  QWERTY
completed because of failin
mation on the screen and it
The user 4 with low vision
mance  using  LêBraille.  Ac
vided  by  the  interface.  Re
mance between the two vir
skills in Braille and good no
For  some  users,  such  a
computer use had influence
Virtual Qwert. It is importa
in  the  same  section  may  h
Despite  this  fact,  it  should
questionnaire  administered
virtual keyboard in the cate

Y  virtual  keyboard.  According  to  him,  the  task  was 
ng to adapt to the interface, since there was a lot of inf
t requires much effort and precision for locating the ke
n also excelled in the experiment. He had the best perf
ccording  to  him,  this  occurs  because  of  the  contrast  p
egarding  user  5,  which  practically  had  equivalent  perf
rtual solutions, we noticed that he is a user with advan
otions on computer uses. 
s  users  3  and  8,  the  intermediate  domain  of  Braille 
es on the inefficient performance in relation to the use
ant to note that the use of the physical QWERTY keybo
ave  helped  them  to  remind  and  tie  the  QWERTY  layo
d  be  said  that  through  the  evaluation  criteria  used  in 
d,  all  members  approved  the  Twitter  application  and 
gories described in section 3.3. 

not 
foreys.
 
for-
pro-
fornced 


and   
e of 
oard 
out. 
the 
the 

Graphic 3. Results of 

the Evaluation Questionnaire for the SMS application 

 

Graphic  3  show  the  re
SMS application. The resul
access  the  inbox  messages
Most users, 88.8%, confirm
pact and motivates them. A
es and content, and 66.6% o
tent. Over 66.6% accepted 
tool to support Braille learn

sults  of  the  application  of  the  same  questionnaire  for 
lts were obtained after completion of the third activity (
s  and  send  an  SMS  message  to  a  specific  mobile  phon
med that the proposed technology is interesting, has an 
Also, 77.7% of users reported the ease of browsing the p
of users considered acceptable the speed to access the c
the idea of combining SMS with LêBraille to be used a
ning (one user chose not to answer). 

the 
i.e., 
ne). 
im-
pag-
conas 
a 

5 

Discussion and C

Conclusions 

Mobile  devices  have  a  maj
ubiquity of touchscreen dev
for  new  ways  to  allow  tex
modal  interfaces  (i.e.,  hapt
avoid interaction issues with

jor  role  in  today's  information  society.  If  the  trend  of 
vices without physical keyboard is confirmed, the resea
xt  input  and  the  design  of  mobile  applications  with  mu
tics,  gesture,  audio  recognition)  should  be  encouraged
h these devices by people with disabilities. 

the 
arch 
ultid 
 to 

 

144 

A.R. Façanha et al. 

In this paper, we present an initiative in this context, focused on the issue of text 
input on touchscreen devices. Different from other studies more centered on the production 
of  new  keyboard layouts,  we propose to reuse the layout of six cells of the 
Braille  system.  People  with  visual  disabilities  were  able  to  accomplish  the  writing 
activities with both the LêBraille virtual keyboard and the mobile applications developed 
in this study. All three activities implemented were able to be performed by the 
users:  tweet  the  alphabet,  tweet  a  proverb,  and  send  SMS  with  a  phrase  the  user's 
choice. In some cases, the writing pace was as quick as or faster than with an alpha 
numeric virtual keyboard. However, for all users, the speed of writing in both virtual 
keyboards  approaches  (a  QWERTY  virtual  keyboard,  and  the  LêBraille)  was  much 
slower than the activity with a physical keyboard. 

When analyzing the results of writing paces we should also take into consideration 
that the users had contact with the applications only during the experimentation sessions.
 This occurred since the Android system in its version 2.3, even with the use of 
screen reader TalkBack, did not provide full autonomy to the user with visual disabilities 
to operate the device. Thus, it is essential to implement a long term usability evaluation 
considering a bigger sample and diverse contexts of use in order to monitoring 
whether there is a significant time reduction to write and send messages or tweets.   

Furthermore, in the field of education, touchscreen devices are being inserted into 
learning environments to facilitate interaction between the student and the content to 
be  learned.  Researchers  are  increasingly  and  actively  exploring  ways  to  integrate 
touchscreens devices in m-learning environments. The study presented here, as well 
as  in  [1,9,10,11],  show  the  need  for  further  research  leading  to  the  development  of 
new mobile accessible technologies. Therefore, these new studies should promote the 
inclusion of students with visual disabilities in these new classrooms practices. 

As future work, we envision developing educational games that use the LêBraille 
virtual keyboard to serve as a tool to stimulate student writing. These games can be 
used in non-formal school literacy activities of people with visual disabilities, or even, 
for training sighted people who want to learn or practice Braille in a playful way. 

References 

1.  Oliveira, J., Guerreiro, T., Nicolau, H., Jorge, J., Gonçalves, D.: BrailleType: Unleashing 
Braille  over  Touch  Screen  Mobile  Phones.  In:  Campos,  P.,  Graham,  N.,  Jorge,  J.,   
Nunes, N., Palanque, P., Winckler, M. (eds.) INTERACT 2011, Part I. LNCS, vol. 6946, 
pp. 100–107. Springer, Heidelberg (2011) 

2.  Façanha,  A.R., Viana,  W., Pequeno, M.C.:  Estudo  de  interfaces  acessíveis  para  usuários 
com  deficiência  visual  em  dispositivos  móveis  touch  screen.  In:  XVI  Congreso  Internacional 
de Informática Educativa (TISE 2011), Santiago Chile (2011) 

3.  Kane, S.K., Wobbrock, J.O., Ladner, R.E.: Usable gestures for blind people: understanding 
preference  and  performance.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  SIGCHI  Conference  on  Human   
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2011), pp. 413–422. ACM, New York (2011) 

4.  Kane, S.K., et al.: Access overlays: improving non-visual access to large touch screens for 
blind users. In: Proc. of the ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology 
(UIST 2011), pp. 273–282. ACM, New York (2011) 

5.  WCAG. Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0. (2008),   

http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG/ 

 

  Touchscreen Mobile Phones Virtual Keyboarding for People with Visual Disabilities 

145 

6.  Lunt,  P.,  Livingstone,  S.:  Rethinking  the  focus  group  in  media  and  communications   

research. Journal of Communication 46(2), 79–98 (1996) 

7.  Levy, P.S., Lemeshow, S.: Sampling of Populations: Methods and Applications, 4th edn. 

Wiley Series in Survey Methodology (2008) 

8.  Sánchez, J., Aguayo, F.: Mobile Messenger for the Blind. In: Stephanidis, C., Pieper, M. 
(eds.)  ERCIM  Ws  UI4ALL  2006.  LNCS,  vol. 4397,  pp.  369–385.  Springer,  Heidelberg 
(2007) 

9.  Tinwala, H., MacKenzie, I.S.: Eyes-free text entry on a touchscreen phone. In: Proceedings 
 of  the  IEEE  Toronto  International  Conference  –  Science  and  Technology  for   
Humanity – TIC-STH 2009, pp. 83–89. IEEE, New York (2009) 

10.  Bonner,  M.N.,  Brudvik,  J.T.,  Abowd,  G.D.,  Edwards,  W.K.:  No-look  notes:  accessible 
eyes-free  multi-touch  text  entry.  In:  Floréen,  P.,  Krüger,  A.,  Spasojevic,  M.  (eds.)   
Pervasive 2010. LNCS, vol. 6030, pp. 409–426. Springer, Heidelberg (2010) 

11.  Guerreiro, T., Lagoá, P., Nicolau, H., Gonçalves, D., Jorge, J.A.: From Tapping to Touch-
ing:  Making  Touch  Screens  Accessible  to  Blind  Users.  IEEE  MultiMedia 15(4),  48–50 
(2008) 

12.  Lucas,  D.,  Nicolau,  H.,  Guerreiro,  T.,  Jorge,  J.A.:  NavTilt:  Interface  Gestual  para   
Cegos.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  4th  National  Conference  on  Human-Computer  Interaction 
(Interacção 2010), Aveiro, Portugal (2010) 

13.  Millard, D., Howard, Y., Gilbert, L., Wills, G.: Co-design and Codeployment Methodologies 
 for  Innovative  m-Learning  Systems.  In:  Multiplatform  E-Learning  Systems  and   
Technologies: Mobile Devices for Ubiquitous ICT-Based Education. IGI Global (2009) 

14.  Frey,  B.,  Southern,  C.,  Romero,  M.:  Brailletouch:  Mobile  Texting  for  the  Visually   
Impaired. In: Stephanidis, C. (ed.) Universal Access in HCI, Part III, HCII 2011. LNCS, 
vol. 6767, pp. 19–25. Springer, Heidelberg (2011) 

15.  Mascetti, S., Bernareggi, C., Belotti, M.: TypeInBraille: a braille-based typing application 
for touchscreen devices. In: The Proceedings of the 13th International ACM SIGACCESS 
Conference  on  Computers  and  Accessibility  (ASSETS  2011),  pp.  295–296.  ACM,   
New York (2011) 

 

