Guidelines for Designing Mobility and Orientation 

Software for Blind Children 

Jaime Sánchez and Miguel Elías  

University of Chile 

Blanco Encalada 2120, Santiago, Chile 

{jsanchez, melias}@dcc.uchile.cl 

Abstract. We present a study about the use of current electronic travel aids to 
help blind  people navigate  through  familiar  and  unfamiliar  environments.  We 
also  discuss  the  main  strengths  and  weaknesses  of  electronic  travel  aids  and 
propose guidelines to design and use them adequately. We provide a proposal  
to develop and use traveling aids. As a result, this can be a first step towards 
defining  major  aspects  to  develop  travel  aids  oriented  to  assist  mobility  and 
orientation of blind people.  

Keywords:  Mobility  and  Orientation,  User-centered  software  development, 
Blind users, Electronic travel aids, Virtual environments. 

1   Introduction 

Software  design  for  users  with  special  needs  entails  strict  requirements  and  user 
involvement. We cannot test software for people with visual disabilities by just blindfolding 
ourselves and other sighted users and try to mimic their interaction with the 
interfaces. A sighted user can not simulate the behavior of a blind user because their 
cognition and mental models are not alike [17]. Thus their feelings and tastes when 
interacting with digital devices are not really predicted. Therefore, when developing 
software  interfaces  for  people  with  visual  disabilities,  additional  efforts  from 
designers and programmers are required. They have to understand the way blind users 
mental  models  work  by  continuously  testing  them  throughout  the  development 
process.  

Currently, in spite of diverse efforts [3], [7], [8], [9], [10] made to provide blind 
people with aids to support their navigation through indoor or outdoor environments, 
research  on  how  and  why  to  do  this  is  scarce.  Some  existing  aids  are  very 
sophisticated  and  use  top  of  the  line  technology  [9],  [20],  but  not  necessarily  are 
targeting the blind user’s needs and interests.  Some of them are additional burden for 
the visually impaired. As a result, there is a clear shortage of usability studies on these 
issues and a lack of studies concerning the real impact of these aids on mobility and 
orientation performance of blind users.  

This  research  presents  traditional  mobility  aids  and  the  skills  involved  when 
navigating.  We  introduce  Electronic  Travel  Aids  (ETAs)  and  discuss  the  main 
troubles  with current designs. As a result of this analysis,  we present guidelines  for 

C. Baranauskas et al. (Eds.): INTERACT 2007, LNCS 4662, Part I, pp. 375–388, 2007. 
© IFIP International Federation for Information Processing 2007 

376 

J. Sánchez and M. Elías 

developing  software  for  people  with  visual  disabilities  with  special  emphasis  on 
supporting Mobility and Orientation (M&O) skills by illustrating and classifying the 
main aspects involved and discussing the concretion of these guidelines in  software 
design for blind people.  

Electronic Travel Aids are assistant devices designed to support blind users during 
navigation  through  indoor  and  outdoor  environments.  They  span  from  talking 
compasses to complex devices that  make use of  magnetometers and inertial  sensors 
such as accelerometers and gyroscopes. ETAs comprise that employ sound beacons, 
ultrasonic  pulse-echo  sonar  systems,  infra-red  detectors,  among  others  [3],  [7],  [9], 
[10], [15], [20].  

Many efforts have been made to complement or even replace the most employed 
and  successful  traveling  aid  so  far:  the  white  cane,  to  support  blind  people  when 
traveling and avoiding obstacles by using the available technology (like GPS, RFID 
and WI-FI). ETAs usually have been developed by targeting on specific problems, but 
generally  they  provide  an  obstacle-avoiding  system,  location  and  orientation 
information, and optimal routes calculations during navigation [14].  

The  main  drawback  of  existing  ETAs  is  that  current  developments  are  not  usercentered.
  This  implies  a  series  of  usability  and  interaction  issues,  failing  when 
providing  solution  to  travel  issues  faced  by  blind  people  when  traveling,  and  even 
creating new problems to them.  

One of the main problems of current devices is the way information is presented to 
users.  They  do  not  present  relevant  information  in  a  way  users  can  actually  be 
oriented  and  sometimes  overwhelm  users  with  a  huge  amount  of  information.  For 
instance,  some  ETAs  show  a  potential  cognitive  overload  by  presenting  more  than 
7±2  concepts  on  each  interface,  which  is  recommended  for  short-term  memory 
processing issues and retention capacity [16]. This may be a consequence of a general 
understanding  that,  due  to  its  difficultness  and  dangerousness  for  blind  people  to 
move around without perceiving well their surroundings, travel aids should provide a 
sufficient  amount  of  information  about  the  environment  to  create  a  mental 
representation of the location. This caused that many early developed ETAs pursued 
to present as much information about the environment as possible. This turned out to 
be  an  excessive,  confusing  and  unnecessary  amount  of  information  which  only 
confused blind users [12].  

Leonard  [6]  made  an  experiment  with  blind  people  about  interaction  with 
information  concluding  that  what  is  necessary  and  useful  in  a  traveling  aid  is  to 
present just small amounts of information, from which blind people can improve their 
navigational  performance.  These  pieces  of  data  about  the  environment  should  be 
presented  in  such  a  way  that  does  not  interfere  with  the  information  already  being 
gathered  by  the  blind  individuals.  This  means  that  the  amount  of  information 
presented should be short enough to create a mental map of the environment, without 
causing  cognitive  overload.  Also,  it  should  not  occlude  the  information  that  blind 
people use as primary clues for mobility and orientation.  

Literature shows that efforts in ETAs research aimed mainly at obstacle detection 
and  avoidance,  but  as  Loomis  et  al.  [11]  indicate,  these  devices  have  failed  in 
contributing to the accomplishment of a more efficient navigation. The main reason is 
that  providing  a  way  of  improving  the  navigation  of  blind  people  depends  on 
information  that  is  beyond  the  reach  of  these  devices.  Many  studies  fall  short  in 

 

Guidelines for Designing Mobility and Orientation Software for Blind Children 

377 

determining what are real needs of blind people when navigating through familiar and 
unfamiliar environment. In some cases researchers have not been able to detect a need 
for a specific kind of information [20].  

One  of  the  most  important  issues  of  current  ETAs  is  the  lack  of  usability 
evaluations  to  validate  the  design  of  the  interfaces  being  used  by  blind  people.  For 
instance, some devices utilize a set of headphones affecting the hearing perception of 
blind individuals and upon  which they base  most of their  navigation. Other devices 
require that users utilize both hands to operate them, thus impeding blind individuals 
to use a cane or self-protection techniques.  

Some  devices  are  simply  not  designed  for  blind  people  and  require  so  much 
learning  and  training  (like  reduced  Braille  and  QWERTY  keyboards),  that  they 
become an additional obstacle to blind users. Furthermore, there are some proposals 
of  using  big  and  heavy  robots  to  guide  blind  people  who  ultimately  present  an 
additional  barrier  for  them  when  taking  the  stairs  or  walking  through  narrow 
hallways.  As  Vogel  [21]  states,  “…traditional  navigation  aids  for  the  blind  can  be 
inconvenient  to  port,  can  be  customized  only  with  difficulty  and  manually,  and 
usually cannot indicate the user’s location…”, p.2.  In addition, formal evaluations of 
the  impact  of  using  one  particular  device  for  mobility  and  orientation  of  blind 
individuals  are  not  frequent.  This  means  that  the  real  value  of  a  particular  ETA  to 
improve the quality of life of a blind person is neither quantified nor determined.  

Many  ETAs  research  consist  of  highly  customized  devices  that  aim  to  solve  a 
particular navigation problem. Usually they focus on the technology involved rather 
than  in  the  real  problems  of  blind  people  when  traveling  through  an  unfamiliar 
environment. One common agreement in this field is that there is no standard solution 
for  the  indoor  navigation  problem  [7].  This  leads  to  several  unsolved  problems, 
raising the cost of customized devices, thus making it more a barrier than a solution. 
Unfortunately, this widens the gap between blind people and technology. People with 
visual  disabilities  do  not  feel  that  the  marginal  mobility  improvement  provided  by 
ETAs is worth the high price of these devices. 

As a consequence, we propose to consider a more practical approach, centered on 
the  needs  and  problems  of  blind  individuals  when  navigating  through  unfamiliar 
environments  and  considering  low-cost  technology  already  tested  successfully  with 
people with visual disabilities, such as PDAs [18].  

The literature proposes some elements to be considered when developing traveling 
aids for blind people. Loomis & Golledge [10] state that the most significant needs of 
visually  impaired  people  when  navigating  can  be  summarized  in:  accessing  to 
information, accessibility to the environment, and independence when navigating.  

Accessing to information with their remaining senses can be achieved by devices 
that  have  multimedia  features,  such  as  audio  and  haptic  interfaces.  These  devices 
should focus on providing information that users can not obtain by their own means. 
Alternative  displays  such  as  Braille  labels  or  tactile  maps  can  also  be  used  when 
presenting information.  

Accessibility  means  not  only  that  blind  individuals  can  enter  and  move  around 
inside  a  particular  environment,  but  also  implies  they  will  be  able  to  recognize 
landmarks, understand the layout of its components and navigate safely.  

Independence when navigating implies that we should focus ETAs as M&O aids to 
help blind users to be more independent human beings. This can be considered from 

378 

J. Sánchez and M. Elías 

different points of view. First, there is no need for providing a traveling aid that can 
be an additional trouble for the blind individual. Therefore, it should make navigation 
easier, not demanding. This is the reason why we think that complex systems, such as 
robots or laptop-based devices, are not the right way to go, since their size and weight 
are a burden to users. Second, we feel that most devices should have a bounded life 
cycle.  This  means  that  the  technology  involved  should  support  the  acquisition  and 
development of M&O abilities, not replace the human processes involved. The goal is 
to  enhance  an  independent  navigation  of  blind  individuals  through  the  usage  of 
mobile. The role that an electronic aid can play in navigation should decrease as the 
individual  develop  more  M&O  skills  and  strategies.  Third,  a  person  with  visual 
disabilities  should  not  depend  on  other  people  (sighted  or  blind)  to  navigate  a 
surrounding environment.  

According to the Colorado Department of Education [4], blind students can benefit 
from  understanding  the  physical  environment,  orienting  to  different  school  and 
community  environments,  traveling  in  school  and  in  the  community  and  finding 
opportunities for unrestricted, independent movement and play. This means that blind 
students should be able to learn, understand, and mentally represent the environment. 
They should be capable of comprehending the main elements in a particular type of 
indoor environment such as a school, a shopping mall or a public building, and their 
uses and functions. They should also be able to navigating them, travel to and from 
common and crowded places (like the cafeteria), and experiment new environments 
widening  their  M&O  skills  and  knowledge.  In  a  preliminary  approach  [8],  people 
with  visual  disabilities  envisioned  M&O  aids  that  augment  their  perception  of  the 
environment, announced points of interest located out of the reach of users and helped 
them  to  navigate  through  those  points,  and  filtered  objects  according  to  a  certain 
classification. 

Cox & Dykes [5] stated that some of the relevant skills to be developed by blind 
children  inside  the  school  environment  are  related  to  knowing  landmarks,  such  as 
classrooms  organization,  common  sectors  (libraries,  cafeteria),  and  knowing  the 
location of entrances, exits and main offices. Hub et al. [7] mentioned that, according 
to  some  surveys  carried  out  with  blind  individuals;  these  people  have  several 
problems  with  stairs,  irregularities  of  the  ground,  and  doors  localization.  This  is 
stressed with their inability to realize the purpose of some rooms and buildings. 

2   Methodology 

We  conducted  several  interviews  in  Santiago,  Chile,  with  M&O  specialists,  blind 
children  and  youngsters,  to  gather  their  opinions  and  feelings  about  the  issues  and 
difficulties  that  blind  children  face  on  a  daily  basis  when  navigating  indoor 
environments.  We  asked  them  questions  that  allowed  to  understand  how  blind 
children travel to and from the school, how they move inside it, what problems they 
face  when  navigating  in  their  schools  and  in  other  indoor  environments,  and  what 
opinion they have about including blind children to traditional schools.  

Scenario. Six interviews were conducted in Santiago, Chile, from March to October, 
2006. The interviews took place in several locations, involving two types of schools: 
traditional  (those  designed  for  sighted  children)  and  special  (differentiated  or 

 

Guidelines for Designing Mobility and Orientation Software for Blind Children 

379 

segregated as they are commonly named). One interview was made at the Center for 
Computing and Communication for the Construction of Knowledge of the University 
of Chile. 

Sample. The participants were very diverse, five blind youngsters (ages between 20 
and 32 years old) and seven blind children (ages between 8 and 14 years old). Five 
children  attended  a  special  school  and  the  other  two  attended  traditional  schools. 
Three M&O specialists also participated; one of them is currently the teacher of M&O 
courses  at  the  Metropolitan  University  of  Educational  Sciences.  The  other  two 
specialists  are  in  charge  of  the  M&O  courses  taught  in  a  segregated  school  for  the 
blind. Additional participants were two special education teachers, experts on vision 
disorders,  three  teachers  and  three  educational  psychologists  from  two  traditional 
schools that integrate blind students.  

Instruments.  Diverse  open  interviews  were  applied  for  students,  teachers  and 
parents. All of them were unstructured interviews based on a previously established 
guideline with varying number of questions. The answers and comments made during 
interviews were recorded and saved in audio files. The interviewers also took written 
observational notes during the meetings.  

Procedure.  We  conducted  a  first  interview  in  March  of  2006,  at  the  Center  for 
Computing and Communication for the Construction of Knowledge of the University 
of Chile. The participants were five blind adolescents, two special education teachers 
(experts on vision disorders), and three computer science engineers. The focus of that 
interview  was  on  the  problems  that  blind  youngsters  had  when  facing  familiar  and 
unfamiliar environments, and how they travel from one location to another, what kind 
of  public  transportation  they  currently  use,  what  strategies  they  have  when  facing 
different problems, etc.  

In June of 2006 the teacher of the M&O courses at the Metropolitan University for 
Education Sciences was interviewed. She explained what the M&O courses are, and 
how  they  teach  them  to  in-service  special  teachers  that  will  later  work  with  blind 
people.  During  the  same  month  two  teachers  from  the  School  for  the  Blind  “Santa 
Lucía”,  were  also  interviewed.  They  were  in  charge  of  the  M&O  courses  taught  in 
that school. They provided information about the problems they face every day with 
blind  children  as  their  students,  what  landmarks  they  use  as  reference  points,  what 
strategies  are  used  by  children  when  they  face  problems,  and  what  kind  of 
information  they think  would be useful to deliver by an electronic travel aid. Later, 
another  school,  the  private  school  “The  Maisonnette”,  was  contacted.  They  have 
integrated  a  blind  girl  into  their  school.  We  interviewed  two  of  her  teachers,  along 
with the curriculum coordinator. The focus of the interviews was on problems faced 
by the blind girl when moving through the school, what pedagogical changes they had 
to do in their classes, and the impact of incorporating a blind child as student. We also 
had  the  opportunity  of  observing  the  blind  child  in  one  class  and  her  navigation 
through the school’s yard during breaks.  

In July of 2006 we interviewed three educational psychologists of the “Lastarria” 
high school, a public institution that has integrated three blind children. After that we 
also met and interview one blind student. The focus of the interview was the same as 
in  the  other  interviews  previously  described.  In  September  of  2006  we  interviewed 

380 

J. Sánchez and M. Elías 

five  blind  children  (four  of  them  with  loss  of  vision)  that  attend  the  “Santa  Lucía” 
School for the Blind. We asked them about the problems they face when navigating 
and what landmarks they use to orient themselves.  

We finally made an in-depth interview on October of 2006 with the blind girl from  
“The Maisonnette” School, in her house. We talked with her mother, who mentioned 
the problems faced when her daughter navigates indoor environments and the efforts 
made  to  integrate  her  in  a  school  for  sighted  children.  Later,  we  talked  to  her,  a  9 
years old child  who told us about how she  moves inside her school, what problems 
she faces (such as route planning and getting lost), and how a guiding digital device 
should  look  like.  All  the  information  we  gathered  from  these  interviews  were 
analyzed and summarized in the following section.  

M&O  specialists  were  asked  about  the  type  of  information  they  think  should  be 
useful  to  provide  to  blind  children  during  their  navigation  through  the  school 
environment.  They  mentioned  that  the  most  important  information  was  the 
environment corners, middle points, and the location of every day visited places, such 
as  bathrooms  and  exits.  They  mentioned  that  is  also  important  to  provide  to  blind 
people contextualized information of the surroundings (cardinal location of sidewalks, 
public transportation). The main difficulties of blind people when navigating through 
indoor environments pointed out by specialists were the detection of obstacles beyond 
the  scope  of  their  primary  mobility  aids  (canes  or  even  their  own  body).  Lintels, 
beams, chandeliers and arches are examples of these obstacles.  

When  we  asked  blind  youngsters  about  their  problems  when  navigating  indoor 
environments, they agreed that they frequently collide with obstacles not detected by 
their primary mobility aids. Some examples of these obstacles are stairs and entrances 
with  low-height  steps  (so  the  cane  passes  right  over  them).  When  inquired  about 
problems  in  their  navigation  within  the  school,  blind  children  said  that  they  were 
mainly  concerned  about  colliding  with  a  wall  or  other  people,  and  the  chance  of 
changing  the  landmarks  currently  used  to  other  unknown  places,  revealing  that 
sometimes they use temporal information for navigation.  

Blind people want to know where they are and what objects are close to them, but 
they do not want other people to tell them about everything. When augmenting their 
reality by  means of artificially enhancing their perception  we should opt to provide 
them  information  which  cannot  perceived  autonomously.  Once  the  blind  person 
knows  where  he  or  she  is,  the  next  step  is  helping  him  or  her  to  plan  a  route, 
providing the necessary information so he or she can make an informed decision on 
what legs to follow. This is obtained not only by providing information of landmarks 
and paths in advance, but also by providing additional information such as the cost of 
each path (in terms of their lengths and hazards).  

According to Baldwin [2], teaching routes should have a concrete purpose to make 
learners able to travel to places of their interest. This is complemented  with a goalorientated 
strategy. After the student is able to travel a certain route it is suggested to 
revert it and increase the number of landmarks. It is also recommended to start with 
straight routes on which rotations can be included incrementally.  

We should not  make the decision  for them  when presenting  ways of  getting to a 
place. Sometimes people (blind or sighted) may choose a path that does not appear to 
be “optimal”, but that may have hidden benefits that influence their decisions. They 
can actually figure out shortcuts and navigate them, but sometimes their decisions rely 

 

Guidelines for Designing Mobility and Orientation Software for Blind Children 

381 

on  factors  beyond  saving  time.  They  may  prefer  to  use  a  less  cognitive  demanding 
route,  less  crowded,  with  more  easily  detectable  landmarks,  and  less  environmental 
noise (distracting sounds, absence of reference cues). At times they even do not care 
about which route to take, even though the route chosen may be not the best route. As 
a blind Chilean student stated, she knows that the hallways of her school form a loop, 
so  it  does  not  matter  which  way  to  go,  since  she  will  always  arrive  safely.  Blind 
students  should  develop  the  ability  to  choose  between  different  navigational 
alternatives and make informed decisions. 

Blind children have a restricted perception capacity as a consequence of their lack 
of interaction with the environment, provoked by their fear to explore and parents and 
teachers  overprotection.  They  also  have  a  weak  body  image  and  difficulties  to 
understand spatial concepts [1]. These abilities should be developed early, altogether 
with motor coordination and pre-cane skills.  

The lessons learned after our interviews suggest that computer systems should be 
designed to reduce the anxiety and stress that arise in blind navigators when dealing 
with  unknown  environments.  A  game-oriented  approach  can  contribute  to  this 
objective,  especially  when  having  children  as  end-users.  Blind  children  should  be 
exposed to situations where they have to solve problems perceiving information and 
thinking  individually  at  their  own  pace,  and  as  a  group  working  collaboratively  in 
teams. This is why we suggest avoiding the development of a software solution that 
solves every single navigation problem; rather it should be an aid that allows them to 
solve  problems  by  their  own,  encouraging  the  development  and  use  of  M&O  skills 
and abilities.  

Finally,  we  should  also  consider  the  children’s  learning  curve.  We  should  start  by 
using  familiar  elements  with  simple  lessons  before  starting  more  complex  and 
challenging  schemes.  We  should  keep  in  mind  that  the  earlier  a  blind  child  starts  an 
M&O  program,  the  sooner  he  or  she  would  become  independent  and  able  to  navigate 
independently.  In  cases  when  the  child  does  not  have  the  appropriate  neuromuscular 
development to use of a mobility aid such as the cane, an ETA can be an appropriate aid.  

Landmarks.  When  teaching  routes  to  blind  children  (and  blind  individuals  in 
general), the use of landmarks is essential. They are references within an environment 
that  allow  blind  individuals  locating  elements  in  their  precise  position  (doors  and 
stairs)  and  approximate  position  (smell  or  sound).  Information  provided  by  a 
landmark allows finding a way and through the memorization of references, to easily 
rebuild a route when a landmark appears in the path. A customization feature should 
be  provided  when  using  landmarks.  Each  individual  utilize  different  sets  and 
combinations of textures, smells and sounds to orient themselves. What is useful for 
one person could not be useful to others, even not recognizable by most blind users.  

The  interviews  with  blind  children  evidenced  different  positions  concerning 
landmarks for mobility and orientation purposes. While some of them stated that they 
use landmarks (such as water fountains, light variations and smells) on a daily basis, 
others  said  that  they  did  not  use  landmarks  while  navigating  (at  least  consciously). 
We believe that the latter group is not aware of the real importance of understanding 
and utilizing landmarks for navigational purposes. The literature stated that landmark 
information combined with an audio interface can enhance the mental mapping of the 

382 

J. Sánchez and M. Elías 

blind user [12]. Therefore, we should focus our efforts in developing travel aids that 
support training and utilization of landmarks, since this would be most beneficial for 
blind children navigation.   

3   Guidelines for Developing Software for Context Navigation 

The  development  of  software  for  people  with  visual  disabilities  can  be  a  great 
challenge  for  designers,  since  it  implies  a  multidisciplinary  approach.  Many  issues 
mentioned  can  be  overcome  by  following  a  series  of  guidelines  designed  from  an 
integration  of  recommendations  suggested  by  researchers  and  our  own  formal 
observations  previously  described,  that  should  be  considered  when  developing 
software for blind people, especially for navigation of blind children. We also present 
some  specific  guidelines  for  developing  mobility  and  orientation  software  to  train 
individuals  in  their  navigation  of  familiar  and  unfamiliar  virtual  environments  and 
during online guidance and support when navigating real environments.  

Model. In the context of M&O software we would expect to be scalable, flexible, and 
adaptable. One approach is to use validated models in similar contexts in the past and 
adjust them to current needs. Then, we want to ensure that children will actually use 
that aid. This can be achieved by designing software appealing and encouraging, thus 
motivating its use. Games and playful activities could fit well this need. Besides how 
attractive  or  entertaining  is  the  software  it  has  to  be  usable.  Therefore,  usability 
evaluations  should  be  mandatory.  Sánchez  &  Baloian  [19]  mentioned  that  when 
developing software  for blind users, one of  the  most important  guideline is that the 
software  should  be  based  on  a  model,  game-oriented  and  consider  formative  ans 
summative usability evaluations. 

Fig. 1. Model of software for blind children (from Sánchez, J. & Baloian [19]) 

 

 

 

Guidelines for Designing Mobility and Orientation Software for Blind Children 

383 

A  suitable  model  and  methodology  that  can  be  adapted  to M&O  development  is 
proposed  by  [19],  used  for  designing  and  developing  audio-based  games  for  blind 
children. In this model (see Figure 1), a combination of incremental and evolutionary 
development is proposed considering the stages of analysis, design, development, and 
validation, by making particular considerations when developing educational software 
for blind children. We think that this model is pertinent for developing M&O software 
for  blind  users,  since  it  considers  a  prototyping  approach  that  allows  lowering  the 
associated  risk  of  failing  to  map  the  user’s  mental  model,  and  can  be  adjusted  to 
potential unrevealed requirements at a low cost.  

The  model  proposed  should  also  be  adapted  and  instantiated  to  reflect  new 
interactions and features arising from the use of software in mobile devices for M&O 
purposes. When passing from a desktop to a mobile application, the main adjustment 
is  related  to  acknowledge  the  role  played  by  the  environment:  it  is  dynamic  and 
evolutionary, and triggers the user’s actions. 

Game  orientation.  By  considering  children  as  end-users  the  software  should  be 
game-oriented  to  let  them  to  learn  in  a  playfully  way.  By  combining  learning  and 
entertainment  (edutainment)  we  can  provide  a  dynamic  and  appealing  experience, 
thus enhancing a more effective learning. Gaming is an interesting way of achieving a 
higher  commitment  of  learners  with  the  learning  process  due  to  the  emotional 
involvement of the player during the game. Games are a good and attractive way of 
practicing higher order skills such as problem solving. The model suggested is gameoriented 
 emphasizing  cognitive  tasks  embedded  in  the  software  through  a  game 
metaphor interface.   

Evaluation. The proposed model considers the use of formative and summative endusers 
 usability  evaluations.  This  is  fundamental  to  gather  data  about  the  users´ 
acceptance  and  how  well  the  software  meets  their  mental  models.  By  considering 
methods  such  as  heuristic  evaluations  and  cognitive  walkthroughs,  hidden 
requirements are highlighted to improve the user’s interaction. Virtanen & Koskinen 
[20]  stated  that  the  evaluation  of  a  device  should  not  be  made  in  terms  of  the 
information  provided;  rather  the  focus  should  center  on  the  real  benefits  produced. 
Children should practice with the applications in real environments and contexts, thus 
assuring safe and natural activities.  

Interfaces.  User  interfaces  should  be  intuitive  and  suitable.  The  best  possible 
interaction models to select type, quantity and ways of presenting information should 
be used [21]. Users should have modes of customizing the presentation of information 
according to their needs and interests. When having people with visual disabilities as 
users,  particularly  those  who  have  loss  of  vision,  interfaces  should  be  designed  in 
ways to fully exploit the remaining visual channel to perceive information. When the 
interface  includes  text  (in  menus  and  labels),  sans  serif  fonts  should  be  considered, 
since  the  resolution  of  computer  screens  is  lower  than  paper.  This  makes  screen 
reading easier and less exhausting. A clear interlining spacing and highly contrasting 
colors (such as blue/yellow or black/white combinations) should be also considered.  

Iconic photographic images should be preferred. It is most likely that people with 
visual disabilities are not able to appreciate small details of an image (such as facial 
features  of  a  character).  Instead,  simple  and  clear  icons  should  be  used.  Icons  must 

384 

J. Sánchez and M. Elías 

have good contrast with the background color and should be related with audio clues 
to  let  users  comprehend  their  functionalities.  Audio  cues  must  be  included  so  users 
can  construct  a  mental  model  of  the  virtual  environment,  and  thus  improving  the 
interaction.  

Interaction.  Different  ways  of  navigating  the  virtual  environment  should  be 
provided.  This  encourages  users  to  explore  several  traveling  strategies  and  the 
construction  of  knowledge  about  routes,  locations  and  timings.  Ultimately,  this 
contributes to the construction of the mental representation of the virtual environment. 
Furthermore,  exploring  different  navigational  strategies  and  approaches  in  a 
controlled  and  safe  virtual  environment  can  be  the  first  step  to  encourage  blind 
individuals to do the same in real environments. 

Users  should  be  make  decisions  and  take  actions.  They  should  be  allowed  to 
interact freely and directly with every element in the virtual environment. Even tough 
sometimes some type of guidance is necessary; users should be free to decide whether 
or not to accept the suggestions made. Each user’s action should have an immediate 
and clear feedback, so he or she can realize permanently what has been done and what 
are the consequences of their actions, thus supporting cognitive interaction.  

Audio cues. Audio is an essential channel to convey information to blind users. Good 
quality and easily identified audio should be used. Non spoken sounds are easier to 
listen than verbal audio cues [12], they do not distract users from navigation and can 
be easily ignored. Iconic sounds (sometimes called earcons) are appropriate to convey 
information,  whether  it  is  general,  specific  or  quantitative.  Earcons  are  also  nondisruptive 
to users [21]. Although spoken sounds  may be  appealing and  useful they 
can not be modified after recording. However, the use of earcons does not exclude the 
use of verbalized forms of audio. If spoken sounds are used to provide more complete 
description  of  landmarks,  for  instance,  they  can  be  more  useful  if  we  use  cardinal 
coordinates in our descriptions, providing lengths by using step counting and M&O 
concepts (turns, quarter-turns).  

Artificial sounds should not occlude natural sounds coming from the environment 
intake.  One  way  to  accomplish  this  is  considering  the  “cocktail  party  effect”  when 
providing  audio  cues  in  the  presence  of  environmental  sounds.  This  means  that  we 
can exploit the human ability of listening to several sound sources at the same time, 
without getting confused. This also implies users can pick one sound in particular, as 
humans do when several people are talking and find a conversation nearby to be of 
their interest. 

Sound  pinned  to  landmarks  should  be  representative  of  the  point  of  reference  in 
such  away  that  users  can  identify  them  through  sound.  For  instance,  if  a  water 
fountain  is  used  as  a  landmark,  a  running  water  sound  effect  could  be  a  good 
reference.  

Monophonic and stereo sounds as primary navigational senses should be avoided 

since using them may block environmental sounds.  

Content  &  information.  Information  has  to  be  available  anytime  time  and  users 
should be able to listen important messages whenever they need to do so. Sometimes 
the interaction can be asynchronous. If a user listen environmental audio cues such as 
messages  coming  from  a  speaker  in  the  subway  station,  or  if  he  or  she  talks  to  a 

 

Guidelines for Designing Mobility and Orientation Software for Blind Children 

385 

friend,  the  information  provided  by  the  navigational  aid  can  be  missed.  Outdoor 
designs should consider the asynchronous features of interaction and provide ways of 
repeating important messages in any moment.  

Instructions  should  be  clear  and  simple  [21],  since  users  have  to  remind  them 
during interaction with the navigational software. This pursues to present information 
processed by users without distracting them from navigation.  

The  information  provided  by  a  navigational  device  should  to  be  contextualized 
information.  Not  every  piece  of  information  available  is  useful  for  navigational 
purposes. Only a small subset of information should be presented to users according 
to their needs during navigation. ETAs should provide the orientation and position of 
users, their targets and landmarks to avoid cognitive overhead.  

Every  user  is  different  to  the  other  and  sometimes  a  piece  of  information  that  is 
essential  and  relevant  for  one  user  can  be  completely  incidental  for  another. 
Therefore, some degree of customization has to be considered. ETAs should be able 
to  adapt  to  users,  selecting  adequately  the  hints  provided  to  fit  the  needs  and 
experience  of  the  current  user.  Customization  should  be  made  by  users  through 
adapting  the  related  software  and  provided  as  intelligent  agents  that  learn  and  plan 
present and future users´ needs.   

Representation  of  the  environment.  Some  elements  should  be  repeated  iteratively 
throughout different environments. For instance, most indoor environments are fairly 
rectangular or squared-shaped. Many of them have four walls, a floor and a ceiling, 
and  at  least  one  entrance/exit.  One  example  of  this  type  of  environments  is  a 
classroom.  Almost  every  classroom  has  a  chalkboard,  chairs,  tables,  and  so  on, 
therefore  when  students  understand  the  layout  and  composition  of  one  classroom, 
their knowledge can be generalized to the rest of classrooms. The same concept can 
be extended to other environments such as a mall, the zoo and the library. This idea 
can be complemented with the work done by Kàpic [8] who stated that to represent an 
environment  and  routes  we  should  utilize  a  rectangular  approach.  Routes  should  be 
composed  of  straight  segments  that  intersect  each  other  in  a  90-degrees  angle  and 
their lengths should be of not longer than ten meters (approximate 33 feet). If the right 
angle  approach  is  not  enough  for  a  particular  environment,  then  we  can  use  clock 
navigation for directions.  

The location and orientation of users should be known anytime anywhere. A way 

of detecting a missed path should be also provided.  

Devices  &  Infrastructure.  Devices  utilized  should  be  small  enough  to  be  carried 
comfortably  (in  a  palm  hand  or  in  the  pocket).  This  means  that  the  devices  used 
should  meet three  main requirements. First, the device should not interfere  with the 
primary mobility navigation aid used by a blind user, such as canes and guide dogs. 
Second,  as  many  blind  individuals  declare,  any  M&O  aid  should  not  highlight  the 
blind  user  as  a  person  with  disabilities.  This  is  one  of  the  reasons  why  many  blind 
children do not like using the white cane, since although this mobility aid has many 
advantages  it  socially  shows  them  as  blind  users.  The  interfaces  and  size  of  the 
devices should also be suitable and comfortable enough for blind users. 

Devices utilized in M&O contexts should have low battery consumption, so they 
can provide uninterrupted services for reasonable timeframes. Software designed for 
these devices should provide ways to alert users when battery is low loading. Many of 

386 

J. Sánchez and M. Elías 

these  devices  manage  databases  and  I/O  features  (microphones,  speakers  or 
earphones). This implies that there is a minimal processing power required for these 
devices. According to Kàpic [8], devices should have a monitoring system embedded 
that provides information about the remaining battery and processing capabilities.  

Users  should  be  able  to  receive  and  utilize  location-dependent  services  not  only 
from  static  repositories,  but  also  from  other  users,  designing  the  infrastructure  in  a 
scalable way to preserve users´ privacy. The cost of the solution (considering devices 
and infrastructure) should be low and imply few changes in the current environment 
to  make  it  replicable.  One  way  of  achieving  this  is  using  devices  meant  for  other 
purposes, instead of building new ones from scratch. One option is the use of PDAs, 
which are increasingly being used in schools for educational purposes, thus lowering 
entrance  barriers.  PDAs  comprise  the  required  battery  and  processing  capabilities, 
multimedia  features,  portability,  and  their  cost  is  reasonable  (compared  to  laptops). 
Cell  phones  also  meet  these  requirements  with  the  additional  advantage  of  being 
worldwide massively distributed.   

4   Discussion 

Many efforts have been made to complement or even replace the white cane as an aid 
tool for blind people. ETAs developers should not focus on this “replacement” intent 
since it is very unlikely to redesign such a device that is cheap, portable and useful as 
the white cane. We should make efforts to complement this navigation aid rather than 
to replace it trying to change the primary navigation aids. This implies a device that 
can detect and inform users about obstacles and hazards beyond the reach of primary 
mobility  aid  (cane,  guide  dogs),  and  provide  information  about  the  environment  to 
help blind people to develop a more accurate mental model of the surroundings.  

Sometimes  the  problem  is  not  the  use  of  an  aid  but  its  misuse.  Some  specialists 
said that  some blind individuals  walk very  fast and do not utilize  the cane properly 
(they describe only a tight sweep, for instance), due to an excess of confidence or just 
because  of  trying  to  keep  the  pace  of  sighted  people,  missing  some  obstacles  and 
thumping on them. 

There  is  no  such  a  product  that  can  solve  every  single  problem  of  every  blind 
individual. This is not a pessimistic but a rather realistic affirmation. ETAs developers 
should  not  expect  to  solve  all  M&O  problems  for  every  blind  person.  Instead,  we 
believe  that  research  studies  should  encourage  and  promote  the  development  and 
utilization of M&O skills in blind people to achieve an independent, safe and efficient 
navigation, promoting problem-solving features of navigational aids. 

It is essential to develop a deeper understanding about blind users’ interest, needs 
and way of knowing. As Psathas [13] stated, people navigate mechanically so many 
behaviors  and  tasks  are  made  unconsciously,  being  unable  to  verbalize  current 
practices and issues involved during navigation. 

The cost of ETAs should not be a barrier for a blind individual. Developers should 
consider low-cost technology fully tested with people with visual disabilities, such as 
PDAs,  devices  that  can  be  used  for  many  purposes  (like  educational  software, 
collaborative  work)  besides  to  M&O.  Schools  everywhere  are  starting  to  insert  this 
kind of technologies into curriculum. Considering also the high social penetration of 

 

Guidelines for Designing Mobility and Orientation Software for Blind Children 

387 

cell phones, it is most likely that in the short-term, most students will have a mobile 
device with the required capabilities to use them as ETAs. Therefore, the idea is to reuse 
existing devices and infrastructure for M&O purposes, ending up with a system 
that  is  cheap,  available  to  blind  people,  that  provides  the  information  needed  for 
navigation,  allows  them  to  understand  the  environment  without  the  aid  of  a  sighted 
person,  has  low  impact  on  the  existing  infrastructure,  and  thus  making  feasible  to 
implement it everywhere.   

There  is  a  clear  need  for  guidelines  when  developing  navigational  software  for 
blind users, especially for children. This is why we provide guidelines for developers 
that  should  be  seen  as  the  starting  point  to  draw  from  their  own  experiences.  For 
instance, we suggest that highly contrasting colors should be used, but if you use only 
three or four colors, children with residual vision will get bored of the interface. This 
is  why  we  suggest  trying  new  combinations  of  colors,  images  and  media,  starting 
from  experience.  But  any  design  experience  should  be  evaluated  formally  with  real 
end-users,  during  a  significant  timeframe,  using  usability  methods,  and  considering 
that it is very unlikely to come up with an interface that works for every user and suits 
every single need. This should be considered as a challenge to design interfaces that 
meet the interaction model of most blind users.  

Interfaces for long-term interaction should consider that certain types of blindness 
are degenerative so designers should incorporate some evolutionary features to adjust 
itself to the loss of vision.  

ETAs  should  not  be  an  additional  burden  to  blind  people  when  navigating.  This 
implies  that  blind  users  should  be  able  to  navigate  autonomously,  without  the 
assistance  of  a  sighted  individual.  The  devices  are  portable  and  easy-to-use  when 
walking through narrow hallways or taking the stairs. In addition, we should aim at 
letting  users  to  diminish  their  dependency  on  the  involved  technologies  as  they 
develop, use and improve M&O skills for navigation. 

Emerson Foulke once said that we know more about what is involved in getting a 
man to the  moon than about  what is involved in  getting a  blind person to cross the 
street.  As  analyzed  and  discussed  in  this  report,  ETAs  are  far  from  being  a  final 
solution for navigational problems of blind people, but they are a very good starting 
point  to  help  blind  children  to  develop,  use  and  rehearse  mobility  and  orientation 
skills for a better social inclusion. 

Acknowledgements. This report was funded by the Chilean National Fund of Science 
and Technology, Fondecyt, Project 1060797. 

References 

1.  Arnaiz, P., Martínez, R.: Educación Infantil y Deficiencia Visual. Editorial CCS. pp. 66-97 

(1998) 

2.  Baldwin,  D.:  Teaching  Orientation  and  Mobility  to  Blind  Children  (e-Book),  Chapter  3: 
Navigating  without  vision.  Retrieved  (October  2,  2006),  from  www.wayfinding.net/ 
play.htm 

388 

J. Sánchez and M. Elías 

3.  Cheung,  S.,  de  Ridder,  S.,  Fishman,  K.,  Francle,  L.,  Patterson,  J.:  A  Personal  Indoor 
Navigation  System  (PINS)  for  people  who  are  blind.  Retrieved  (November  28,  2006), 
from vision.psych.umn.edu/~gellab/5051/prev_projects/pgs1.pdf  

4.  Colorado  Department  of  Education.  Orientation  and  Mobility  as  a  Related  Service. 
Retrieved  (November  28,  2006),  from:  http://www.cde.state.co.us/cdesped/download/ 
pdf/OM_Related_Service.pdf 

5.  Cox,  P.,  Dykes,  M.:  Effective  Classroom  Adaptations  for  Students  with  Visual 

Impairments. Teaching Exceptional Children 33(6), 68–74 (2001) 

6.  Heyes,  T.:  Electronic  Travel  Aids  –  Why  Bother?  Retrieved  (August  21,  2006),  from: 

web.aanet.com.au/tonyheyes/pa/quest.html 

7.  Hub, A., Diepstraten, J., Ertl, T.: Design and Development of an Indoor Navigation and 
Object  Identification  System  for  the  Blind. In: Proceedings  of  the  ACM  ASSETS  2004, 
Atlanta, Georgia, USA, October 18-20, pp. 147–152. ACM Press, New York (2004) 

8.  Kàpic, T.: Indoor Navigation for Visually Impaired (Retrieved July 18, 2006) (2003) from 

www.mics.ch/SumIntU03/TKapic.pdf  

9.  Kulyukin,  V.,  Gharpure,  C.,  Nicholson,  J.,  Pavithran,  S.:  RFID  in  robot-assisted  indoor 
navigation for the visually impaired. In: Proceedings of IEEE/RSJ IROS 2004 Conference, 
September - October 2004, vol. 2, pp. 1979–1984. Sendai Kyodo Printing, Sendai, Japan 
(2004) 

10.  Loomis,  J.,  Golledge,  R.:  GPS-Based  Navigation  Systems  for  the  Visually  Impaired.  In: 
Barfield,  W.,  Caudell,  T.  (eds.)  Fundamentals  of  Wearable  Computer  and  Augmented 
Reality, pp. 429–446. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah, NJ (2001) 

11.  Loomis,  J.,  Klatzky,  R.,  Golledge,  R.:  Navigating  without  vision:  Basic  and  Applied 

Research. Optometry and Vision Science 78(5), 282–289 (2001) 

12.  Millar,  D.:  Spatial  Audio  Interface:  Providing  Landmark  Information  to  Help  the  Blind 
Navigate Outdoors (Retrieved April 4, 2006) (2002), from www.cs.unc.edu/~vogel/IP/IP/ 
info/dorianm_fall2002.pdf  

13.  Psathas,  G.:  Mobility,  Orientation  and  Navigation:  Conceptual  and  Theoretical 

Considerations. New Outlook for the Blind 9, 385–391 (1976) 

14.  Ran,  L.,  Helal,  A.,  Moore,  S.:  Drishti:  An  Integrated  Indoor/Outdoor  Blind  Navigation 
System and Service. In: Proceedings of the 2nd IEEE Pervasive Computing Conference, 
Orlando, Florida, pp. 23–30. IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos (2004) 

15.  Ross,  D.,  Lightman,  A.,  Henderson,  V.:  Cyber  Crumbs:  An  Indoor  Orientation  and 
Wayfinding  Infrastructure.  In:  28th  Annual  RESNA  Conference  Proceedings  (Retrieved 
July 7, 2006) from, www.cc.gatech.edu/~vlh/pubs/resna05.pdf 

16.  Sánchez, J.: Visible Learning, Invisible Technology. Dolmen Ediciones, Santiago (2001) 
17.  Sánchez,  J.,  Sáenz,  M.:  3D  sound  interactive  environments  for  blind  children  problem 

solving skills. Behaviour & Information Technology 25(4), 367–378 (2006) 

18.  Sánchez, J., Aguayo, F.: Mobile Messenger for the Blind. In: Stephanidis, C., Pieper, M. 

(eds.) EP 2007. LNCS, vol. 4397, pp. 369–385. Springer, Heidelberg (2007) 

19.  Sánchez,  J.,  Baloian,  N.:  Modeling  3D  interactive  environments  for  learners  with  visual 
disabilities.  In:  Miesenberger,  K.,  Klaus,  J.,  Zagler,  W.,  Karshmer,  A.I.  (eds.)  ICCHP 
2006. LNCS, vol. 4061, pp. 1326–1333. Springer, Heidelberg (2006) 

20.  Virtanen,  A.,  Koskinen,  S.:  NOPPA:  Navigation  and  Guidance  System  for  the  Blind. 

(Retrieved June 30, 2006), from virtual.vtt.fi/noppa/noppa%20eng_long.pdf 

21.  Vogel,  S.:  A  PDA-Based  Navigation  System  for  the  Blind.  M.S.  Integrative  Paper 
(Retrieved  April  6,  2006)  (2003),  from  http://www.cs.unc.edu/~vogel/IP/IP/IP_versions/ 
IPfinal_SuzanneVogel_Spring2003.pdf 

 

