Designing Serious Videogames through Concept Maps 

Jaime Sánchez and Matías Espinoza 

Department of Computer Science, 

Center for Advanced Research in Education (CARE), 

University of Chile, Blanco Encalada 2120, Santiago, Chile  

{jsanchez,maespino}@dcc.uchile.cl 

Abstract.  The  purpose  of  this  study  was  to  present  and  evaluate  a  new  technique 
 through  the  use  of  concept  maps  for  the  design  of  serious  videogames  
using  Ejemovil  Editor.  This  was  accomplished  by  using  a  method  to  easily 
transform concept maps into directed graphs, which are then used to generate 
the  videogame  sequence  and  the  interdependencies  between  the  various  elements.
 With this tool teachers are able to define the storyline of the videogame, 
incorporating the concepts that they want to teach in a structured way. To these 
ends, an editor was created using this methodology that allows for the construction 
of mobile videogames. Teachers that currently use concept maps have evaluated 
 the  proposed  methodology.  Preliminary  results  show  that  the  proposed 
methodology for the design and creation of serious videogames for education is 
appropriate,  easy  to  use,  generally  accepted  and  understandable  for  the  end  
users. 

Keywords:  Concept  Maps,  Serious  Videogames,  Videogames  Editor,  Videogames 
Design. 

1 

Introduction 

In the last decades, two technologies have entered the classroom in support of learning.
 The first are concept maps, which were created by Novak in 1972 and which are 
used  to  support  meaningful  learning  [5].  The  second  technology  is  the  videogame 
industry,  which  paradoxically  began  with  Pong  in  the  same  year,  and  which  has 
evolved to become a billion dollar industry [10]. 

Currently,  the  development  of  educational,  mobile  videogames  is  limited  to  the 
category  of  trivia  games  [8].  Several  experiences  [8][9]  have  used  such  devices  to 
take advantage of their potential for using specific messaging services. Mobile Author 
[15] is an application that aids teachers in creating and maintaining their educational 
resources on a  virtual platform. Some experiences  with this application have developed 
RPG videogame editors, such as RPGMaker [11], which is designed for amateur 
users.  Although this editor provides a great deal of freedom regarding the ability to 
create  videogames,  it  is  not  oriented  towards  the  development  of  videogames  in  an 
educational context. 

 

M. Kurosu (Ed.): Human-Computer Interaction, Part II, HCII 2013, LNCS 8005, pp. 299–308, 2013. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 

300 

J. Sánchez and M. Espinoza 

There are also several experiences based on the use of concept maps as pedagogical 
 instruments  that  have  demonstrated  effective  results  in  primary  education 
[1][4][6].  A  tool  called  Concept  Gaming  [0]  can  generate  concept  maps  made  by  a 
teacher or a learner. Then the students can interact with the concept map in five different 
game modes by adding concepts or relationships. In this case the result is not a 
videogame, because the students are directly interacting with a concept map. 

Wu  et  al.  (2012)  presented  a  teaching  strategy  that  involved  the  use  of  concept 
maps  for  the  design  of  videogames  [16].  There  are  also  methodologies  based  on  
concept maps that facilitate the creation of videogames [2][14]. Bellotti et al. (2013) 
proposed  a  serious  game  model  related  to  cultural  heritage,  using  an  approach  very 
similar to the mind-maps concept [2]. Treanor et al. (2012) presented a methodology 
involving a videogame authoring tool based on concept maps called Game-O-Matic, 
which generates games to represent ideas [14]. 

The purpose of this study was to present and evaluate a new technique through the 
use  of  concept  maps  that  allows  teachers  to  integrate  concept  mapping  and  mobile 
videogame  technologies,  enabling  them  to  create  serious  videogames  with  content 
organized  by  using  the  Ejemovil  videogame  Editor  [12].  In  this  case,  the  students 
interact with a mobile RPG videogame generated from a concept map. 

2 

Ejemovil Videogame Editor 

Ejemovil  Editor  was  previously  developed  [12]  with  the  capacity  to  generate  structures 
 similar  to  concept  maps,  in  order  to  design  and  create  mobile  serious  videogames.
 The idea is  to provide teachers  with  an easy-to-use tool that allows them to 
create videogames based on the concept mapping technique. Such games can then be 
provided to students of primary education, who can use them for learning. 

The editor generates RPG style videogames, in which the player controls a character 
 that  interacts  with  other  virtual  players  (see  Figure  1).  In  these  interactions,  the 
player is presented  with a series of questions that have three alternative answers, in 
which  there  is  only  one  correct  answer.  In  addition,  the  questions  are  progressively 
unlocked by other associated, dependent questions; in other words, the players must 
answer  certain  questions  correctly  before  being  able  to  unlock  the  questions  associated 
with other virtual characters.  

The  questions  are  related  to  a  specific  topic,  which  in  the  videogame  are 
represented by an icon and a bar that indicates the player’s progressive score. Each 
videogame has a maximum of three topics upon which the questions are based. The 
maximum score per topic is 100. The maximum score per questions is equivalent to 
100  divided  by  the  number  of  questions  associated  with  that  particular  topic.  The 
maximum score is assigned when the player responds correctly to a question on the 
first  try,  without  having  made  mistakes  previously  on  the  same  question.  When  
the player responds correctly on the second try, half of the maximum assigned for the 
question  is  awarded.  Finally,  when  the  player  responds  correctly  after  two  or  more 
tries, one quarter of the maximum score for that question is awarded. 

 

Designing Serious Videogames through Concept Maps 

301 

Fig. 1. Videogame screenshot 

 

2.1  Editor Sections 

The  editor  has  seven  main  sections  for  the  creation  of  a  videogame:  Introduction, 
concept definition, diagnostic evaluation, selection of  main characters, script definition,
 game over, and the export for download to the mobile device. 

The Script Definition section is the main section of the editor (see Fig. 2). It allows 
the teacher to create a graph based on a concept map, and to provide each node with a 
position over the game map. It also allows the user to define the characters that will 
represent each of the concepts in the game, and to configure their particular properties 
and characteristics. This section includes the following main elements: (i) Start Node 
corresponds  to  the  most  inclusive  concept  on  the  concept  map,  which  implies  the 
most general concept. It is the starting point for the videogame. (ii) Node corresponds 
to any concept on the concept map, besides the most inclusive (start node). Teachers 
add  nodes  to  the  videogame,  and  these  nodes  have  various  associated  properties 
(name,  welcome  text,  question,  answer  choices,  etc.).  There  can  be  two  different 
kinds of nodes. A multiple-choice question node presents the player with a question 
and three possible answer choices. On the other hand, an item question node presents 
the player with a question that asks him to find one of three items that are dispersed 
throughout  the  map.  (iii)  End  Node  is  the  ending  point  of  the  game  and  does  not  
correspond to any concept on the concept map. 

 

302 

J. Sánchez and M. Espinoza 

Fig. 2. The Script Definition section 

 

2.2  Design Technique for Videogames 

A  concept  map  can  be  used  as  a  road  map  to  show  some  of  the  pathways  that  are 
available for connecting the meanings of concepts through the use of proposed concepts 
[7, 13]. The idea of using concept maps as a way to design serious videogames 
has emerged from this line of thinking. 

A graph satisfies the properties of a concept map. Concept maps are hierarchical, 
with the more inclusive concepts located up high and the less inclusive concepts located 
below [7]. The absolute hierarchy of a node corresponds to the number of nodes 
that there are between the end node and the original node. 

Another  point  to  keep  in  mind  is  that  graphs  do  not  support  edges  composed  of 
more than two nodes like the one shown in Figure 3.a. In order to deal with this problem,
  relationships  on  a  concept  map  that  link  three  or  more  concepts  (N  concepts) 
through one linking word need to be accommodated, as shown in Figure 3.b, linking 
the concepts through N – 1 linking words (Transformation 1). 

Another characteristic from concept maps that is supported by the graph representation 
proposed is cross-links, which are relationships between concepts within different 
domains of a concept map. In order to represent the cross-links, an additional step 
is required (Transformation 2). For a cross-link from concept C1 to concept C2, a new 
concept needs to be added, concept C2’. Concept C2’ has the same name as concept 
C2 and a link from C1 to C2’ needs to be made. The original cross-link from concept 
C1 to C2 is then deleted. New links need to be made from concept C2’ to each of the 
concepts to which concept C2 is linked (See Figure 4). 

 

 

  

Designing Serious Videogames through Concept Maps 

303 

 

(a) 

(b) 

Fig. 3.  (a)  Relationship between  three  concepts on  a  Concept Map.  (b)  Transformation  1  required 
by the editor. 

 

  
           (a) 

 

(b) 

 

Fig. 4. (a) Cross-link between concept C1 and concept C2 on a Concept Map. (b) Transformation 
2 required by the editor. 

The proposed technique for videogame design consists of the following steps: (i) 
Checking whether the conditions necessary to perform transformations 1 and 2 have 
been  met, and performing the desired transformations if possible. (ii) For each concept 
 on  the  concept  map,  add  a  node  (character)  to  represent  it  on  the  videogame 
screen map. (iii) For each relation that connects two concepts, add an arrow between 

304 

J. Sánchez and M. Espinoza 

the two nodes that represent the concepts. (iv) For the properties of each node, form a 
question using the highest-order concept (or concepts) that are directly related to the 
concept that is represented by the node, together with a connecting phrase (connector) 
describing  the  relation.  (v)  In  the  properties  of  each  node,  use  the  concept  that  the 
node represents as the correct answer to the question that the character presents to the 
player.  

3 

Videogame Design Evaluation 

A  preliminary  evaluation  was  performed  in  order  to  evaluate  the  proposed  design 
methodology, to determine if the creation of a videogame from a concept map is appropriate 
and easy enough for a teacher to do. It was also important in order to learn 
what  the  teachers  thought  of  the  methodology  in  pedagogical  terms,  or  if  they  believed 
that the game is able to convey successfully the information contained in the 
concept  map  to  the  students,  making  it  possible  to  understand  the  hierarchies  and 
relations between the concepts.  

3.1 

Participants 

A group of 13 participants was tested, all of which were in-service teachers. Five of 
these  users  were  male  and  the  other  eight  were  female.  All  of  the  participants  had 
experience with concept maps; one of them said he rarely uses them with his students, 
six of them said they normally use them, five of them frequently use them and one of 
the participants reported that he always uses concept  maps  with his students. All of 
the participants  use computers daily, and  nine of them  had previously  used concept 
map related software. Two facilitators also participated assisting the participants.  

3.2 

Instruments 

In order to evaluate the methodology proposed, a questionnaire divided into two sections 
was used. In the first section, 9 statements were presented to the users together 
with a 5-level answering scale (strongly disagree, disagree, neither agree nor disagree, 
agree, strongly agree) to each statement: (1) It is simple to transfer the concept map 
(CM) to the game. (2) Transferring the concept map to the game is fast. (3) There is 
no loss of information when transferring the concept map to the game. (4) It is simple 
to incorporate the concepts  from the concept  map into the game. (5) It is simple to 
incorporate the relations and hierarchies from the concept map into the game. (6) It is 
simple to incorporate the proposals from the concept map into the game. (7) The end 
result coincides conceptually with the desired result. (8) I have successfully created a 
concept map-based game. (9) The proposals are well represented in the game through 
the dependencies defined in the editor.  

In  the  second  section,  users  were  presented  with  5  open-ended  questions:  “What 
did you like about this methodology?”, “What did you not like about this methodolo-
gy?”, “What would you add to this methodology?”, “What do you think you could use 

 

Designing Serious Videogames through Concept Maps 

305 

this  methodology  for?”, and “What do  you think about  the result?” For these openended 
questions, the users were asked to write answers as long as they wanted. Also, 
an additional space was provided to allow the users to express any situation or opinion 
that they considered to be significant, and which they felt had been left out of the 
questionnaire.  

3.3 

Procedure 

The  first  step  was  to  explain  the  activity  to  the  users.  This  was  followed  by  an  
explanation  of  the  methodology  that  would  be  used  to  create  a  concept  map-based 
videogame, which was explained to each user individually. Afterwards, each user was 
provided with a pre-established concept map, based on the concept of the atom, and 
was asked to create a videogame based on this map using the editor. In order to standardize 
the evaluation, the users were not allowed to modify the structure of the preestablished 
concept map. The facilitators observed the entire process of the creation of 
the videogame, and took note of any relevant situations observed or that were mentioned 
by the user. In addition, a screen recorder was used to record the entire process. 
During the evaluation, the facilitators did not answer any questions asked by the participants 
regarding the creation of the videogame, in order to avoid contaminating the 
data  collected.  However,  exceptions  were  made  when  the  users  were  clearly  stuck 
with something, and when the questions were related to the interface. Once the user 
had finished creating the videogame, they were given the evaluative questionnaire to 
fill out in order to capture their immediate impressions and opinions concerning the 
proposed methodology.  

3.4  Results 

The  results  are  promising.  Each  statement  obtained  an  average  score  of  over  4.0 
points out of a total of 5 possible points, which means that the users mostly agree with 
the  statements  (see  Fig.  5).  The  most  poorly  evaluated  statement  is  related  to  the 
speed with which the users were able to create a videogame from a concept map. The 
average result obtained for this statement was 4.08, which means that the users were 
barely in agreement with the statement (2). Despite this score, it is relevant to point 
out that 3 of the 13 users assigned a score of 2 to this statement (disagree), and 7 users 
assigned a  score of 5 (strongly agree). The low result obtained, in comparison  with 
the other statements, is not directly related to the methodology itself, but rather with 
the high number of properties that must be defined in the editor in order to create a 
videogame that is of interest to a player. The definition of the game includes 15 concepts,
 which mean the users had to fill in the properties of 15 different characters in 
the videogame. 

The two most relevant statements regarding the methodology are: statement 1, and 
statement 3. These statements provide an idea of what can be achieved with the editor 
in pedagogical terms. The results obtained for each of these statements were 4.6 and 
4.7, respectively, on a possible scale of 1 to 5. These scores are further corroborated 
by the users’ comments that the videogame created conveys the information from the 

306 

J. Sánchez and M. Espinoza 

given  concept  maps  satisfactorily.  The  users  also  stated  that  they  believe  that  the  
students would be able to perceive the concepts and relations in the videogame’s underlying 
 concept  map.  The  lowest  score  attributed  to  statement  (1)  was  4.0  (agree), 
while the lowest score assigned to statement (3) was 3.0 (neutral). However, only one 
user  attributed  this  score,  and  all  the  rest  either  agreed  or  strongly  agreed  with  this 
statement. 

 

Fig. 5. Results from the methodology evaluation 

 

The statements 4, 5, and 6 represent a disaggregate of statement 1. They are centered 
on each of the individual elements of a concept map independently. The results 
obtained from these statements strengthen the result obtained from statement 1. The 
result  from  statement  4  was  an  average  score  of  4.46,  for  statement  5  the  average 
score was 4.38, and statement 6 presented an average score of 4.46.  

One aspect that  was commented on by most of the users is that they would have 
liked to see the videogame that they had recently created run on their mobile phones. 
However, this was not possible due to the fact that at the time of the evaluation only a 
very  preliminary  version  of  the  videogame  engine  was  used,  which  did  not  include 
appropriate  graphics,  and  for  which  reason  users  could  have  felt  somewhat  disappointed 
with the result. They also mentioned that they would like for the students to 
create the videogames, based on a concept map, by using the editor. 

4 

Conclusions 

In  this  study  we  present  and  evaluate  a  new  technique  through  the  use  of  concept 
maps for the design of serious videogames using Ejemovil Editor. The evaluation of 
the  methodology  is  preliminary  and  a  future  full  evaluation  is  needed  that  incorporates 
the students playing the videogame created by using the proposed methodology 
to  determine  the  cognitive  impact  of  the  application.  However,  in  the  meanwhile  it 

 

Designing Serious Videogames through Concept Maps 

307 

can be pointed out that the perception of the end users regarding the methodology was 
satisfactory. 

All of the users agreed that the transfer from the concept map to the videogame is 
natural, the validity of which was corroborated by observing the results obtained from 
the questions regarding the same aspect, but differentiating between the varying elements 
of a concept map. This is a significant result, as it implies that the users had no 
problems understanding and applying the proposed methodology. As was previously 
mentioned, teachers are generally reluctant  to incorporate new technologies into the 
classroom, for which reason having a methodology that is natural for them to use is an 
important advantage when developing a tool that is oriented towards use by teachers. 
All of the research subjects mentioned that the editor could be a useful tool for teaching.
  Some pointed out that  it  would be useful in order to introduce the subject of a 
new educational unit, while others mentioned that it would be more useful after a unit 
had been entirely taught, in order to help students to review the most important concepts 
and the relationships between them.  

The evaluation provides initial data that indicate that the proposed methodology is 
accepted  by  end  users  and  could  be  appropriate  and  easy  to  use  in  the  design  and  
creation of serious, educational videogames. This is mainly because it incorporates a 
conceptually  organized  and  hierarchical  way  to  present  concepts,  and  because  it  is 
simple  and  natural  to  use.  Finally,  a  wider-ranging  evaluation  regarding  the  design 
methodology presented is needed in order to verify and corroborate that it is understandable 
and easy for teachers to use. The following step is to design an evaluation 
that  includes  students  playing  the  videogame  created  by  teachers  using  the  same  
methodology,  in  order  to  determine  if  they  are  able  to  make  cognitive  progress  by 
playing the game. 
 
Acknowledgments. This report was funded by the Chilean Fund to Promote Scientific 
and Technological Development, Fondef TIC-EDU #TE12I1002, the Chilean National 
 Fund  of  Science  and  Technology,  Fondecyt  #1120330,  and  Project  CIE-05 
Program Center Education PBCT-Conicyt. 

References 

1.  Aparecida, C., Pacifico, F.: Los mapas conceptuales progresivos: un estudio de los estudiantes 
de la escuela primaria. In: Cañas, A.J., Novak, J.D., Vanhear, J. (eds.) Proc. of the 
Fifth Int. CMC, Valletta, Malta (2012) 

2.  Bellotti, F., Berta, R., De Gloria, A., D’ursi, A., Fiore, V.: A serious game model for cultural 
heritage. J. Comput. Cult. Herit 5(4), Article 17, 27 (2013) 

3.  Eronen, P., Nuutinen, J., Rautama, E., Sutinen, E.: Concept Gaming. In: Proc. ICCE 2002, 

p. 997 (2002) 

4.  Hunter, J., Monroe-Ossi, H., Wehry, S., McLemore, B., Fountain, C.: Improving the odds: 
using concept mapping strategies and informational books to build children’s and educa-
tors’ background knowledge. In: Cañas, A.J., Novak, J.D., Vanhear, J. (eds.) Proc. of the 
Fifth Int. CMC, Valletta, Malta (2012) 

308 

J. Sánchez and M. Espinoza 

5.  Novak,  J.D.,  Cañas,  A.J.:  The  Theory  Underlying  Concept  Maps  and  How  to  Construct 

and Use Them,  
http://cmap.ihmc.us/Publications/ResearchPapers/ 
TheoryUnderlyingConceptMaps.pdf 

6.  Merrill, M.: The nature of third grade students’ experiences with concept maps to support 
learning of science concepts. In: Cañas, A.J., Novak, J.D., Vanhear, J. (eds.) Proc. of the 
Fifth Int. Conference on Concept Mapping, Valletta, Malta (2012) 

7.  Novak, J.D., Gowin, D.B.: Learning how to learn. Cambridge University Press (1984) 
8.  Petrova, K.: Mobile learning as a mobile business application. International Journal of Innovation 
and Learning 4(1), 1–13 (2007) 

9.  Petrova,  K.:  Mobile  Learning  Using  SMS:  A  mobile  business  application.  In:  Proc. 

NACCQ 2005, pp. 412–417 (2005) 

10.  Prensky, M.: Digital game-based learning. Comput. Entertain. 1(1), 21 (2003) 
11.  RPGMaker, http://www.rpgmakerweb.com (last accessed: September 15, 2010) 
12.  Sánchez, J., Espinoza, M.: Ejemovil: A Web-Based Tool to Create Mobile Learning Videogames.
 In: Proc. EUC 2011, pp. 205–212. IEEE Computer Society, Washington (2011) 
13.  Sánchez,  J.,  Flores,  H.:  Concept  Mapping  for  Virtual  Rehabilitation  and  Training  of  the 
Blind. IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering 18(2), 210–
219 (2010) 

14.  Treanor, M., Schweizer, B., Bogost, I., Mateas, M.: The micro-rhetorics of Game-o-Matic. 

In: Proc. of FDG 2012, pp. 18–25. ACM, New York (2012) 

15.  Virvou, M.: Mobile authoring and management of educational software applications: usefulness 
and usability for teachers. In: Proc. ED-MEDIA 2004, pp. 5212–5217 (2004) 

16.  Wu,  C.-T.,  Chung,  S.-M.,  Chang,  S.-S.:  Designing  an  interactive  storytelling  game.  In: 
Göbel, S., Müller, W., Urban, B., Wiemeyer, J. (eds.) GameDays 2012 and Edutainment 
2012. LNCS, vol. 7516, pp. 155–160. Springer, Heidelberg (2012) 

