 

Modeling Videogames for Mental Mapping in People 

Who Are Blind 

Jaime Sánchez1, Matías Espinoza1,  

Márcia de Borba Campos2, and Letícia Lopes Leite3 

1 Department of Computer Science and Center for Advanced Research in Education (CARE), 

University of Chile, Santiago, Chile  

{maespino,jsanchez}@dcc.uchile.cl 

2 Faculty of Informatics – FACIN, Pontifical Catholic University of Rio Grande do Sul 

(PUCRS), Porto Alegre, Brazil 
marcia.campos@pucrs.br 

3 Faculty of Education – FACED, Pontifical Catholic University of Rio Grande do Sul 

(PUCRS), Porto Alegre, Brazil 
leticia.leite@pucrs.br 

Abstract. Mental maps allow users to acquire, codify and manipulate spatial information,
 as they are schematics that guide behavior and help to deal with spatial 
 problems  by  providing  solutions.  This  is  to  say  that  mental  or  cognitive 
maps involve processes of spatial reasoning. The purpose of this work was to 
design a videogame development model to serve as a framework for designing 
videogames to help learners who are blind to construct mental maps for the development 
 of  geometric-mathematical  abilities  and  orientation  and  mobility 
(O&M) skills.  

Keywords: Development model, videogames, mental map, geometry, orientation 
and mobility. 

1 

Introduction 

Mental  maps  allow  users  to  acquire,  codify  and  manipulate  spatial  information,  as 
they  are  schematics  that  guide  behavior  and  help  to  deal  with  spatial  problems  by 
providing  solutions  [10].  This  is  to  say  that  mental  or  cognitive  maps  involve 
processes  of  spatial  reasoning  [12].  To  represent  space,  both  sighted  and  visually 
impaired  learners  take  part  in  what  is  known  as  cognitive  mapping  [12],  which  in 
general terms can be understood as an internal model of the world [4]. The result is a 
construct  based  on  the  perceptions  and  experiences  of  the  individual,  put  together 
based  on  his  interaction  with  the  environment,  and  providing  a  particular  point  of 
view. 

A mental map is memorized intellectual knowledge of the form and components of 
a certain trajectory or area [7]. As the notion of a map refers to an internalized representation 
of space, it mixes objective knowledge and subjective perception [12]. Regarding 
the focus of our research, the following research questions have been posed: 

C. Stephanidis and M. Antona (Eds.): UAHCI/HCII 2014, Part II, LNCS 8514, pp. 605–616, 2014. 
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014 

606 

J. Sánchez et al. 

what  degree  of  abstraction  is  it  possible  to  achieve  when  representing  space,  if  one 
does not have the sense of sight? How complex can mental maps are in the case of 
blind individuals? 

In this context, the purpose of this work was to design a videogame development 
model  to  serve  as  a  framework  for  designing  videogames  to  help  learners  who  are 
blind to construct mental maps for the development of geometric-mathematical abilities 
and orientation and mobility (O&M) skills. This work presents a literature review 
regarding the construction of  mental  maps,  geometry learning, and the learning and 
use  of  O&M  techniques  by  people  who  are  blind.  Then  it  presents  and  discusses  a 
model for the design, implementation and evaluation of videogames, in order to create 
videogames that help learners who are blind to construct mental maps. Finally, it discusses 
the desired results of future work related to the use of this model. 

2 

Literature Review 

2.1  Construction of Mental Maps 

Some  authors  propose  that  children  create  mental  maps  sequentially  by  using  landmarks,
 routes and configurations, or spatial relations. This sequence begins with the 
representation  of  isolated  elements,  these  elements  are  then  connected,  and  finally 
relations between different points are established according to a system of references 
and coordinates, which is to say that each one contains the other. On the one hand, a 
route is defined as the way from one landmark to another, for which reason it is necessary 
 to  recognize  such  points  before  beginning  to  construct  a  mental  map.  The 
configurations, on the other hand, correspond to a set of mini-maps that integrate the 
various routes. Configurations are not simply the memorization of all of the routes in 
an environment, but are rather the structure of the set of routes [16]. 

Other  researchers  explain  that  the  creation  of  a  cognitive  map  can  be  achieved 
based  on  direct  contact  with  the  environment  (the  individual’s  movements),  verbal 
descriptions, and supporting material. The internal representation of the space through 
direct contact with the environment is always achieved gradually, through the integration 
 of  information  from  various  sources  [1].  For  visually  impaired  individuals,  the 
use of supporting material can represent the only way of acquiring structured knowledge 
in order to organize spaces and places [12]. 

Cognitive  maps in  human beings cannot be reduced to knowledge of the relative 
disposition of places and routes, as they also include conceptual information and procedural 
 knowledge  regarding  the  use  of  such  information.  These  three  aspects 
represent  the  spatial  reasoning  needed  to  plan  and  make  decisions  when  faced  with 
spatial problems [1]. 

2.2  Learning Geometry  

The use of digital technology for learning geometry has acquired an essential value, as it 
provides  for  the  representation,  construction  and  reproduction  of  geometric  shapes, 

 

 

Modeling Videogames for Mental Mapping in People Who Are Blind 

607 

which favors the development of deductive and inductive processes of interpretive reasoning 
[1]. This is directly related to mathematical modeling, which as a skill allows for 
the construction of a simplified and abstract version of more complex systems. Such a 
skill allows students to learn to use different representations of data, and to select and 
apply methods and tools for problem solving. One basic example is providing an equation 
in order to express a real-life, problematic situation. 

Although mathematics can be performed through verbal, graphic, formal, symbolic 
and other expressions, the basis is rooted in physical reality [3]. In most cases, learning 
 geometry  in  the  classroom  is  supported  by  graphs,  diagrams,  drawings  and  
pictures, all of which are commonly utilized as ways of communicating visual information 
in order to solve a mathematical exercise or problem. It thus worth posing the 
question: how simple, complex or pertinent would it be to communicate visually referenced 
information to learners with visual disabilities during a geometry class? Teaching 
geometry to learners who are blind has traditionally been based on the creation of 
material that allows for the tactile and concrete exploration of shapes and representations,
  which  in  turn  allows  for  an  approximation  to  geometrical  notions  of  volume, 
area and perimeter [11]. Some studies on such methods show that together with didactic 
 material,  the  use  of  mathematical  language  and  gesturing  based  on  the  activities 
performed by  the  student  who is blind and the teacher are both relevant aspects  for 
learning [2]. 

2.3  Learning O&M 

A person with visual impairment must be skilled at O&M in order to achieve a solid 
level  of  navigation,  including  moving  about  safely,  efficiently  and  with  agility,  as 
well as independently in both familiar and unfamiliar environments [6]. The learning 
of O&M skills includes a set of defined techniques that children,  young people and 
adults who are blind (or those with visual impairment) must practice stage by stage. 
However, learning such skills also involves other aspects such as training and refining 
systems  of  perception,  and  both  conceptual  and  motor  skill  development  [6].  Such 
skills are essential precedents for learning formal O&M techniques [6]. The primary 
objective of O&M is to achieve independence and to improve the quality of life for 
people who are blind or who have visual impairments. Instruction in such skills occurs 
in stages, in which the level of difficulty of the training involved varies according 
the learner’s particular characteristics [6]. For example, mobility along a given route 
supposes not only moving from point A to point B, but doing so in an efficient manner,
 knowing where one is located, where one wants to go, and how to get there [1]. 

It is worth pointing out that movement refers to the act and practice of moving, but 
also the act of evaluating known facts and places within the environment, in order to 
facilitate  effective  mobility  and  exercise  one’s  capacity  for  independent  movement 
[7]. This  means  that  people  with  visual  impairment,  when  relating  to  their  environment,
 have “spatial problems”, for which reason they must continuously make pertinent 
“spatial decisions” in order to achieve effective movement.  

Regarding  O&M,  ideally  the  capacity  for  orientation  progresses  from  a  concrete 
understanding of the principles of mobility on a functional level, and finally arrives at 

 

608 

J. Sánchez et al. 

an  abstract  level  through  w
unfamiliar environment [6]
senso-perceptive and conce
rials and techniques, are im
is because these elements a
actions  several times, use  m
ment. 

which  the  learner  is  able  to  function  effectively  within
]. While navigating, it can be deduced that psycho-mo
eptual training, as well as practice in the use of O&M ma
mportant tools for producing a representation of space. T
allow the user to practice and test contextualized movem
memory, as  well as understand  and interpret the envir

n  an 
otor, 
ateThis 

ment 
ronA 
cognitive map, as a pr
tion  to  achieve  mobility  [1
coordinate  adaptive  spatial
movement, and to execute s

rocess of spatial reasoning, provides useful spatial inform
12]. The  function  of  cognitive  maps  in  an  individual  is
l  behaviors,  or  to  generate  action  plans  prior  to  or  dur
such plans within the environment [1]. 

mas 
 to 
ring 

3 

Videogame Deve

elopment Model 

udes  several  different  development  models,  among  wh
Software  engineering  inclu
l  models,  the  latter  of  which  has  been  the  most  used 
are  the  waterfall  and  spiral
8]. These models are generic and only provide one way
accepted in recent years [8
process,  without taking the particularities  that one kind
monitor the development p
ight have into account [13]. Currently, teams are multid
development or another mi
nt to consider all the areas involved in software design 
ciplinary and it is importan
ly important to consider the end user that will use the 
development. It is especiall
plications developed, and th
his must be reflected in the design and development mo
. 
that supports the work [15].
odel for the human-computer interaction in videogames w
The proposed design mo
created  based  on  the  adjus
stment,  improvement  and  extension  of  a  previous  mo
s, restructuring and generation of new components, a co
[14]. Following the analysi
plete videogame developme
ent model was generated that integrates aspects of learni
ognition, in order to improve the cognitive abilities rela
software engineering and co
to geometry and O&M skill
ls in people with visual impairment. 

hich 
and 
y to 
d of 
disand 

apodel 


was 
odel 
oming,
 
ated 

Fig. 1. 

Iterative cycle of videogame development 

 

In accordance with the m
to execute the following thr
(i)  Definition  of  the  cogn

model, in order to develop such videogames it is necess
ree processes in a cyclical and iterative manner (Figure
nitive  skills  that  will  be  dealt  with,  whether  related

sary 
e 1): 
d  to  

 

 

Modeling Videogames for Mental Mapping in People Who Are Blind 

609 

geometry and/or O&M, (ii) The software engineering process for the design and development 
of the applications, based on the 5 traditional phases of systems develop-
ment: Preparation, Analysis, Design, Implementation and Evaluation (See Figure 2), 
and (iii) An end user impact evaluation process to measure the effects that the tools 
developed  have  on  the  user.  In  this  way,  the  technological  tool  being  developed  is 
adjusted incrementally in order to provide appropriate solutions to the cognitive objectives 
 related  to  navigation  by  users  who  are  blind.  These  three  processes  are  described 
in the following. 

3.1  Cognitive Abilities 

This  stage  is  fundamental  for  being  able  to  initiate  the  process  for  development  of  
the technological tools. Here the most significant problems that are to be dealt with in 
the  posterior  process  of  software  engineering  are  identified.  As  such,  the  totality  of 
the cognitive skills that must be supported are determined. 

Some authors have pointed out that the O&M skills that can be supported are: (i) 
On  a  cognitive  level,  spatial  relations  (perceptions,  distinguishing  between  different 
objects and the individual), spatial organization (organization of elements), and reference 
points (objects with a certain, permanent location); (ii) On a sensory level, the 
determination of the sources of sounds, classification of textures; (iii) On a psychomotor 
level, directionality and laterality (capacity to recognize a direction, maintaining 
alignment with the body), action time and reaction times, and route efficiency and 
efficacy [5]. 

On the other hand, from the  perspective of a geometry student, it is necessary  to 
construct a certain understanding of the world and access knowledge in a progressively 
autonomous fashion. This demands that students use mathematical language, concepts,
 procedures and reasoning as tools to be able to understand the world and act on 
day-to-day problems. This influences learning of the natural, social and technological 
world as well.  

Both in primary school and during the first years of high school, the focus is on being 
 able  to  recognize,  visualize  and  draw  shapes,  describe  their  characteristics  and 
properties both in 2D and 3D and in both  static and dynamic situations,  understand 
the  structure  of  space  and  describe  it  through  certain  concepts,  and  to  study  the 
movement of objects, in order to develop spatial thinking. Skills such as spatial visualization,
 analytical thinking, calculations, modeling and skills related to solving problems,
  analyzing  the  problem  solving  procedures  and  strategies  utilized,  arguing  and 
communicating,  forming  opinions  and  making  decisions,  and  verifying  and  demonstrating 
properties, all  must be achieved by attending  to a  great degree of diversity. 
This implies the promotion of learning by understanding that the need for education in 
a  differentiated  manner  implies  recognizing  the  personal,  didactic  requirements  that 
some students require.    

3.2 

Impact Evaluation 

Given  the  nature  of  users  with  visual  impairment,  it  is  difficult  to  work  with  very 
large samples of end users, especially when these users are completely blind. For this 

 

610 

J. Sánchez et al. 

reason, the methodology generally follows a case study logic, involving a transversal 
and in-depth analysis of each case and context [15]. In performing a case study analysis,
 there is no need to work with random samples or to include a minimum number of 
subjects [9]. 

Even  with  a  case  study,  researchers  have  been  interested  in  understanding  the 
learning gains in terms of pre-test/post-test scores, as a result of using the application 
(videogame). In this way, the dependent variable corresponds to mental map creation 
skills  to  aid  in  the  comprehension  of  shapes,  bodies  and  the  geometry  skills  under 
review. Basically, this design responds to three steps: (i) Application of a pretest, to 
measure the behavior of the dependent variable before the intervention; (ii) Application 
of the intervention, through the use of the videogame software; and (iii) Application 
 of  a  post-test,  to  measure  the  behavior  of  the  dependent  variable  after  the  
intervention. 

Depending  on  the  focus  of  the  videogame,  there  are  several  different  cognitive 
skills that can be studied through the application of the impact evaluation [5]. In order 
to identify spatial orientation, indicators such as “recognizes spatial relations between 
rooms”,  “recognizes  the  cardinal  orientation  of  the  rooms”,  “identifies  the  spatial 
orientation of objects in the room”, and “describes the cardinal orientation of objects 
in  the  room”  were  utilized.  For  spatial  representation,  the  indicators  used  are  those 
such  as  “represents  the  space  that  was  navigated”,  “represents  the  room  correctly”, 
“represents  the  cardinal  points  correctly”,  and  “represents  the  presence/absence  of 
objects in the rooms”. Finally, spatial knowledge can be obtained by using indicators 
such as “identifies spatial relations between different objects”, “recognizes the walls”, 
“recognizes the doors to the rooms”, and “gets back on the path after taking a detour 
to avoid an obstacle”.  

In order to identify the generation of mental images of shapes and the spatial representation 
 of  objects,  indicators  were  utilized  such  as  “adequate  representation  with 
concrete  material”,  “draws  and  explains  which  shapes  were  envisioned  in  the  proposed 
 problematic  situation”,  “recognizes  changes  in  the  spatial  orientation  of  the 
shape”,  “explores  geometric  shapes  and  bodies  through  haptic  and  audio  feedback, 
both  internally  and  externally,  identifying  their  component  elements”,  “explores  the 
movement possibilities of geometric objects, creating a mental map of the new posi-
tions”,  “represents  the  space  navigated  and  associates  it  to  a  shape”,  “correctly 
represents  changes  to  the  spatial  position  of  shapes  and  geometric  bodies”,  “solves 
geometric  problems  by  communicating  problem  solving  strategies”,  and  “constructs 
and  breaks  down  geometric  bodies  into  parts”.  Finally,  geometric,  mathematical 
knowledge can be obtained by utilizing indicators such as “identifies spatial relations 
between different objects”, “recognizes the number of surfaces and associates them to 
a particular volume”, and “understands basic geometrical concepts (lines, sides, vertices,
 edges, angles, volume, perimeter, area)”.    

Drawing on a plane or using concrete models can be strategies for studying mental 
maps, although  the latter is  more  suitable to  younger children [10]. Other strategies 
include  making a  list of the  places that  were  navigated, recognizing slides and estimating 
distances. However, these resources include some methodological limitations 
[1].  A  map  of  a  city  provides  symbolisms  for  a  large  amount  of  information,  and 

 

 

Modeling Videogames for Mental Mapping in People Who Are Blind 

611 

usually humans learn to get to know their city through direct experience, and not necessarily 
by memorizing a map. It is worth mentioning that knowledge of the environment 
 is  not  only  a  visual  record  of  places,  buildings,  routes,  etc.,  but  also  one  of 
events, concepts, and personal meanings. For this reason, the internal representation 
of space is not an accurate copy of reality. 

Several authors have  made reference to how the creation of a  mental  map by visually 
 impaired  or  blind  learners  should  be  evaluated  [1,12,16]. This  is  because  the 
cognitive map of a person with visual impairment differs from that of a sighted person,
 due to the differentiated sensory inputs that make up their mental images, which 
makes it difficult  for visually impaired people to  generate  fixed and precise images 
[12]. The positions of the objects must be maintained in memory, and in the case of a 
blind person, visual signals from the environment will not be available for use at any 
given moment, or to constantly influence the directions that he or she chooses to take. 
As  such,  what  is  important  is  not  what  is  represented  on  the  map,  but  how  it  is 
represented and what are used as references in order to organize spatial information 
[10]. Utility must be considered as the primary evaluation criteria, rather than establishing 
 how  complete  or  precise  the  map  that  has  been  recreated  by  a  visually  impaired 
person is. 

3.3 

Software Engineering 

A model is proposed based on the 5 traditional phases of systems development: Preparation 
Phase,  Analysis Phase, Design Phase, Implementation Phase and Evaluation 
Phase (Figure 2). The objective of this model is to guide researchers and developers in 
the  software  engineering  process  for  the  design  and  development  of  videogames 
oriented towards improving specific cognitive skills in visually impaired children and 
young people. In particular, in this process a previous model is modified [14] by adjusting,
  improving  and  extending  it  in  terms  of  the  cognitive  abilities  implied  by 
O&M, and geometric thinking. In addition, it points directly to the design of videogames 
as a tool for the development of these skills in people with visual impairment.  
In the following, the process is explained (in the form of guidelines) according to 
its different phases and main components, providing the objective of each phase, as 
well as the activities involved and the expected results.  

Preparation Phase. During this phase, the feasibility for the development of the application 
is determined. This phase requires the relevant information taken from the 
definition  of  the  particular  cognitive  skills  that  are  to  be  developed  (Figure  2).  The 
corresponding stages are: 

Cognitive  skills.  Determine  what  effective  cognitive  skills  will  be  supported  by  the 
videogame to be developed: 
•  Activities. List the skills to develop based on the available technology. 
•  Result.  The  skills  that  are  to  be  developed  and  positively  influenced  through  the 

use of the videogame are determined a priori. 

 

612 

J. Sánchez et al. 

Technological Context. Determine the technology available in the market that would 
be considered for the development of the videogame: 
•  Activities. Generate a list and analysis of available technologies, and identify the 

cost/benefit of these technologies. 

•  Result. Information on which technological devices and development tools will be 

used for the development of the videogame is obtained. 

 

Fig. 2. Software engineering model 

 

Analysis  Phase.  The  objective  of  this  phase  is  to  comprehend  the  problem  that  is 
being solved, analyzing the end users of the videogame, internal and external limitations,
 and the context of its use. The stages are: 

End-User. Analyze the end user of the videogame: 
•  Activities. Specify the characteristics of the end users on a cognitive level, regarding 
their mental models, degrees of vision, and the most significant descriptive variables.
  

•  Result. The end user of videogame is specifically defined. 

Restrictions. Analyze the limitations involved in the use of the videogame by the end 
users:  

 

 

Modeling Videogames for Mental Mapping in People Who Are Blind 

613 

•  Activities.  Identify  the  behavioral  characteristics  of  the  end  user  when  using  the 

available technologies, as well as the social behaviors involved.  

•  Result.  The  rules  of  behavior  or  limitations  of  the  end  user  regarding  use  of  the 
videogame  are  obtained,  to  be  able  to  adequately  develop  the  desired  cognitive 
skills.  

Context of Use. Analyze the real contexts in which the users would be able to carry 
out their activities, given the specific skills that are to be supported: 
•  Activities.  Identify  the  problems  that  are  presented  to  the  users  in  different  real 
contexts, considering a complete profile of the end user and the corresponding limitations 
to using the videogame. 

•  Result.  The  specific  kinds  of  problems  that  the  end  users  may  have  in  using  the 

videogame in real contexts are identified.  

Design Phase. In this phase, the best possible solution is designed, considering that 
the problem has been clearly defined in the preparation and analysis phases. The stages 
are:  

Videogame. Define how the creation of mental maps for the comprehension of specific 
elements and for the development of skills related to the cognitive abilities that are 
to be studied will be supported through the use of a videogame:  
•  Activities. Define the user’s didactic and recreational elements of interaction with 
the  videogame  (playability),  as  a  support  mechanism  for  the  development  of  the 
proposed skills.   

•  Result. A videogame profile is obtained in order to support the specific cognitive 

skills to be developed.   

Human-Computer Interaction Guidelines. Determine specific Human-Computer Interaction 
 (HCI)  guidelines  regarding  how  the  interfaces  and  interaction  between  the 
users and the videogame should be designed, in order to support the development of 
the cognitive skills involved in the study: 
•  Activities. Create or reutilize guidelines for the design of software interfaces and 

those for the interaction between the end users and the videogame.  

•  Result.  How  the  user  who  is  blind  will  interact  with  the  technology  is  defined, 
based on specific guidelines from the field of HCI. This assures that the technology 
will  facilitate  the  correct  development  of  the  abilities  that  are  to  be  improved 
through use of the videogame. 

Tasks. Define the tasks that the end user will perform with the videogame, in order to 
support the creation of mental maps for the comprehension of specific elements and 
the development of abilities related to the cognitive skills that are to be studied: 
•  Activities. Define objectives and activities for each task to be carried out, and the 

objectives, procedures and time limits for each task. 

 

614 

J. Sánchez et al. 

•  Result. The tasks that the videogame will support for the development of the cognitive 
skills to be studied are obtained.  

Virtual  Environment.  Define  the  representation  of  the  virtual  environment  and  its 
relation to reality, in order to achieve the development of  the desired skills through 
the tasks that the end users will perform within the videogame, while also considering 
the HCI guidelines: 
•  Activities. Design the virtual elements of the videogame, determining their relation 
to reality and the support they are to provide for the development of the skills under 
review, applying usability evaluation methods for the software design.  

•  Result. The elements included in the interfaces that will facilitate the development 
of the desired cognitive skills are defined, also establishing a relation between reality 
and the virtual representation.  

Implementation Phase. The objective of this phase is to implement the videogame, 
based on the previous stages during which the problem was clearly defined and a way 
to solve this problem was designed. The corresponding stages are: 

Interfaces. Produce the different interfaces that the blind user will use to develop the 
previously defined tasks: 
•  Activities. Iteratively design and implement the interfaces, considering the application 
of usability evaluation methods with end users or pertinent experts.  

•  Result.  Correctly  designed  interfaces  will  facilitate  the  interaction  between  the 
users and the videogame developed. This will also facilitate the process for the development 
of the desired skills. 

Functionalities. Produce the specific functionalities of the videogame: 
•  Activities. Define and implement the necessary functionalities, designing the kinds 

and structures of associated data, and relating the different interfaces.  

•  Result. The correct and efficient implementation of the videogame’s functionalities 
will lead to the satisfactory development of the user’s skills through the activities 
performed within the videogame. 

Evaluation Phase. During this phase, usability evaluation and functionality tests are 
applied, in order to solve any possible errors or defects, as well as to modify and improve 
the videogame in general. The stages are: 

Usability  Evaluation.  Validate  the  videogame  interfaces  through  specific  usability 
evaluations,  in  order  to  assure  that  the  interaction  between  the  users  and  the  videogame 
are adequate and pertinent: 
•  Activities. Evaluate the usability before, during and after the development of the 
interfaces, following the logic of a user-centered design methodology. To achieve 
this, evaluations of use both in context and in a laboratory setting must be considered.
  

 

 

Modeling Videogames for Mental Mapping in People Who Are Blind 

615 

•  Result. The videogame developed will consider the users’ mental models, interests 
and ways of interacting, based on the usability evaluations applied. These evaluations 
 will  allow  researchers  and  designers  to  understand  and  validate  the  prior  
stages  of  the  model,  during  which  the  modes  of  user  interaction,  as  well  as  any 
problems and the ways in which the users confront such problems were identified.  

Functionalities  (Evaluation).  Validate  that  the  functionalities  of  the  videogame  that 
has been developed fulfill the criteria established in the design phase:  
•  Activities. Perform functionality stress tests in the laboratory regarding the behavior 
of the videogame under different conditions of simulated use.  

•  Result.  It  is  determined  if  the  functions  implemented  really  allow  for  the  user  to 
perform the tasks for the development of cognitive skills through use of the videogame 
that has been designed and implemented. 

4 

Conclusions 

The purpose of this work was to design a videogame development model to serve as a 
framework for designing videogames to help learners who are blind to construct mental 
maps for the development of geometric-mathematical abilities, as well as orientation 
and mobility (O&M) skills.  

This model for the design of Human-Computer Interaction in videogames is geared 
towards guiding researchers and developers in the process of software engineering for 
the design, development and usability evaluation of these applications. It also includes 
the  implications  regarding  the  cognitive  impact  of  using  the  videogames,  oriented 
towards improving geometric-mathematical skills and mental representations in children 
and young people with visual impairment. 

The  present  model  represents  a  significant  contribution  to  the  production  of 
thought-supporting videogames. This is because the model sustains the generation of 
audio  and  haptic-based  mental  images  and  representations,  through  innovative  mechanisms 
for improving the user’s comprehension of space. The end user plays a leading 
role in the design of the videogame, which is based on the user’s mental model 
and adjusted to the user’s form of interaction, improving the overall user acceptance 
of the game. This methodology definitely translates into a usable tool that can aid in 
the  improvement  of  skills  that  are  generally  acquired  through  visual  channels.  As  a 
result,  the  construction  of  the  model  has  the  objective  of  supporting  the  design  and 
development  of  such  tools,  considerably  improving  the  pertinence,  acceptance  and 
use of these systems by end users. 

For actual and future work, this model is been used for diverse videogame applications 
and will be used as the basis for the development of videogames that strengthen 
O&M skills and/or geometric-mathematical abilities in users that are blind and those 
with visual loss, by stimulating the construction of mental maps.  

Acknowledgments. This report was funded by the Chilean National Fund of Science 
and Technology, Fondecyt #1120330, and Project CIE-05 Program Center Education 

 

616 

J. Sánchez et al. 

PBCT-Conicyt.  It  was  also  supported  by  the  Program  STIC-AmSud-CAPES/ 
CONICYT/MAEE,  Project  KIGB-Knowing  and  Interacting  while  Gaming  for  the 
Blind, 2014. 

References 

1.  Carreiras, M., Codina, B.: Cognición espacial, Orientación y Movilidad: consideraciones 

sobre la ceguera (1993) 

2.  Fernández,  S.,  Healy,  L.:  Inclusion of  bild  student  in  the  mathematics  classroom:  tactile 
exploration of area, perimeter and volume. Mathematics Education Bulletin 23(37), 1111–
1135 (2010) 

3.  Fernández, J.: La enseñanza de las Matemáticas a los ciegos. Juma, Madrid (1986) 
4.  Golledge,  R.,  Stimpson,  R.:  Spatial  behaviour:  a  geographic  perspective.  The  Guilford 

Press, Nueva York (1997) 

5.  González, F., Millán, L., Rodríguez, C.: Orientación y Movilidad. Apuntes del curso “Psicomotricidad 
y Orientación y Movilidad para la persona con discapacidad visual”, VII semestre 
 Trastornos  de  la  visión,  Universidad  Metropolitana  de  Ciencias  de  la  Educación 
(2003) 

6.  Hill,  E.,  Ponder,  P.:  Orientación  y  técnicas  de  Movilidad:  Una  guía  para  el  practicante 

(1981) 

7.  ONCE, Organización Nacional de Ciegos Españoles: Glosario de Términos de Rehabilitación 
Básica de las Personas Ciegas y Deficientes Visuales. Entre Dos Mundos. Revista de 
traducción sobre discapacidad visual (1998) 

8.  Pressman, R.: Software engineering: A practitioner’s approach. McGraw-Hill, S.l. (2009) 
9.  Robert, Y.: Case Study Research: Design and Methods, 3rd edn. Applied Social Research 

Methods Series, vol. 5. Sage Publications (2003) 

10.  Rodríguez,  P.,  Díaz,  C.,  Santamaría,  M.,  Lago,  B.,  Rodríguez,  G.,  Mahtani,  V.:  Bases 

teóricas de la representación espacial en la infancia (2009) 

11.  Rovira, K., Gapenne, O., Ammar, A.: Learning to recognize shapes with a sensory substitution 
system: A longitudinal study with 4 non-sighted adolescents. In: 2010 IEEE 9th International 
 Conference  on  Development  and  Learning,  ICDL  2010  Conference  Program, 
pp. 1–6 (2010) 

12.  Sanabria, L.: Mapeo cognitivo y exploración háptica para comprender la disposición del 
espacio  de  videntes  e  invidentes.  Tecné,  Episteme  y  Didaxis:  Revista  de  la  Facultad  de 
Ciencia y Tecnología 21, 45–65 (2007) 

13.  Sánchez, J., Flores, H., Baloian, N.: Modeling mobile problem solving applications for the 
blind from the context of use. In: International Workshop on Improved Mobile User Experience,
 IMUX 2007, Toronto, Canada, May 13 (2007) 

14.  Sánchez, J., Guerrero, L., Sáenz, M., Flores, H.: A model to develop videogames for orientation 
 and  mobility.  In:  Miesenberger,  K.,  Klaus,  J.,  Zagler,  W.,  Karshmer,  A.  (eds.) 
ICCHP 2010, Part II. LNCS, vol. 6180, pp. 296–303. Springer, Heidelberg (2010) 

15.  Shneiderman,  B.:  Designing  the  user  interface:  Strategies  for  effective  human-computer 

interaction. Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River (2009) 

16.  Siegel, A., Kirasic, K., Kail, R.: Stalking the elusive cognitive map. In: Human Behavior 

and Environment, Advances in Theory and Research. Plenum Press, New York (1978) 

 
 

 

