 

Videogaming Interaction for Mental Model Construction 

in Learners Who Are Blind 

Matías Espinoza1, Jaime Sánchez1, and Márcia de Borba Campos2 

1 Department of Computer Science and Center for Advanced Research in Education (CARE), 

University of Chile, Santiago, Chile 

{maespino,jsanchez}@dcc.uchile.cl 

2 Faculty of Informatics – FACIN,  

Pontifical Catholic University of Rio Grande do Sul – PUCRS, Brazil 

marcia.campos@pucrs.br 

Abstract. The purpose of this work is to present the design, development and 
evaluation of a videogame that allows users who are blind to gradually build up 
a  mental  model  based  on  references  between  different  points  on  a  Cartesian 
plane, in a way that is both didactic and entertaining. Two prototypes were iteratively 
created, and were  subjected to  usability evaluations by the end users, 
who used the videogame in the context of a set of defined tasks. This allowed 
researchers to adjust, improve and validate various aspects of the interfaces that 
had  been  designed  and  implemented.  In  addition,  the  cognitive  impact  of  the 
game on blind learners was evaluated, based on the use of the final version of 
the  videogame,  and  leading  to  revealing  results  regarding  the  proposed  
objectives.  

Keywords: People who are blind, Videogame, Reference system, Mental model,
 Audio and haptic based interfaces, Wiimote. 

1 

Introduction 

For people who are blind, the adoption of a mental model that allows them to orient 
themselves through the use of reference points does not occur naturally as it does with 
sighted people. This is because the latter have associated and familiarized themselves 
visually with the environment since the day they were born. In this way, it is interesting 
to research the mechanisms that are able to foment the construction of a mental 
model  in  people  who  are  blind,  through  a  structure  of  reference  points  that  allows 
them to develop an improved approach to problems, such as orientation and mobility 
when  navigating  [8][14][15][16],  or  interpreting  graphics  and  relationships  between 
points on a Cartesian plane [1][5]. 

One method for the reproduction of haptic and audio trajectories in order to teach 
and transfer information on shapes, gestures and trajectories to people who are blind 
(and those with visually impairment) has been reviewed [3]. The combination of audio 
and haptic-based information significantly improved the performance of blind and 
visually impaired users, for tasks based on recreating shapes [3]. 

C. Stephanidis and M. Antona (Eds.): UAHCI/HCII 2014, Part II, LNCS 8514, pp. 525–536, 2014. 
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014  

526 

M. Espinoza, J. Sánchez, and M. de Borba Campos 

Sonic Grid is a system of audio representation in two-dimensional space that provides 
visually impaired users with a spatial context while navigating graphic user interfaces 
(GUIs) [6]. A multimodal, interactive system based on audio, haptics and visualization 
 was  designed,  in  order  for  users  to  create,  edit  and  explore  graphic  structures 
through  direct  manipulation  operations  [2]. The  MaskGen  system  was  developed  in 
order to transfer the illustrations from schoolbooks into tactile graphics in an interactive 
 manner  [11].  The  results  showed  that  the  tactile  graphics  allowed  visually  
impaired  users  to  explore  the  illustrations  and  to  answer  questions  regarding  their 
content [11]. 

The  various  problems  for  visually  impaired  users  regarding  different  kinds  of 
graphics  supported  by  Excel  (lines,  bars,  circles,  scatter  plots)  were  studied  [1].  In 
order to approach this problem, a system was proposed with the objective of supporting 
a multimodal presentation of two-dimensional graphics through haptic (using the 
Novint Falcon device) and audio (both spoken and iconic) feedback [1]. 

A tangible interface called Tangible Graph Builder was designed, which allows visually 
impaired users to access the information displayed in graphs [10]. Through the 
use  of  this  tool,  visually  impaired  users  were  able  to  adequately  create  graphs  and 
perform navigation-based tasks [10]. 

The  use  of  audio  feedback  techniques  in  order  to  recognize  shapes  and  gestures 
based on spatial sound relations  was reviewed [13]. The interaction is based on  the 
use  of  common  pointers  such  as  the  mouse,  pen  or  finger  on  touch  screens.  When 
navigating a curve, the intensity of the sound reproduced is inversely proportional to 
the distance between the pointer controlled by the user and the curve itself [13]. 

GraVVITAS is an audio and haptic-based tool that serves to provide accessibility 
to graphs, allowing users who are blind to understand a series of graphs, tables and 
planes that  model a particular place [5]. The transfer of information  from  statistical 
graphs to visually impaired people was also studied [7]. TeslaTouch is a technology 
that provides tactile sensation when moving one’s fingers over a touch screen surface, 
through which the device represents the information in 2D [17]. TeslaTouch helps to 
show  people  with  visual  impairment  certain  kinds  of  complex  information,  such  as 
mathematical expressions, illustrations, diagrams and maps [17]. 

A multimodal system of interactive cubes for the orientation of objects that can be 
manipulated by people with visual impairment was developed [9]. Through this system,
  users  can  create,  modify  and  interact  naturally  with  diagrams  and  graphs  on  a 
Cartesian plane, using a multi-touch screen [9]. 

Finally, the use of audio graphics for blind high school learners was also studied 
[4]. The  proposal  considers  audio  graphics  to  be  an  acceptable  alternative  to  visual 
and  tactile  graphics,  in  terms  of  curriculum  compatibility,  learner  performance  and 
teacher satisfaction [4]. 

In this context, the purpose of this work is to present the design, development and 
evaluation of a videogame that allows users who are blind to gradually build up a mental 
model based on references between different points on a Cartesian plane, in a way 
that  is  both  didactic  and  entertaining.  The  research  considered  the  use  of  a  Wiimote  
as  an  entry  device  in  order  to  record  the  user’s  interactions.  In  addition,  a  cognitive 

 

  Videogaming Interaction for Mental Model Construction in Learners Who Are Blind 

527 

analysis was made of the adoption of this structure of coordinates as a theoretical basis 
for moving through real environments.  

2 

Videogame 

The Tower Defense game metaphor was adopted, as this implicitly allows learners to 
be  able  to  interpret  and  associate  points  on  a  Cartesian  plane.  The  videogame  was 
designed, redesigned and adapted in order to fulfill the requirements proposed for the 
project. To achieve this, the trajectories of the game’s enemy units were controlled, in 
order for the user to gradually generate a mental model of their paths, directionalities, 
and the association of their coordinates in order to attack them.   

The videogame is presented on a limited two-dimensional plane, in which the unit 
values for the X and Y-axes are in the range of [-10, 10]. In this way, it is important to 
point out that the solution can be scaled to more extensive planes. The different trajectories 
of enemy  movement determine the  various levels that the game offers. These 
trajectories are determined by points on the Cartesian plane. The enemies start off at 
point (0,0), which is referred to as the starting point, and they eventually arrive at an 
ending point. In order to pass a level, the player must arrive to the ending point of the 
enemy’s trajectory first, and install the tower that will be used to attack them.  

In order to develop the videogame, C# language was utilized, as well as the videogame 
development framework Microsoft XNA Framework 4.0. This was used together 
with the Visual Studio 2010 Ultimate and Microsoft XNA Game Studio 4.0 tools. 

2.1  Design 

The videogame contains the following main elements: map, player pointer, enemies, 
towers and levels. The videogame map is displayed on a Cartesian plane made up of 
whole numbers, along which the enemies travel. The player moves and can locate the 
towers  that  will  attack  the  enemies.  This  map  identifies  the  points  on  the  Cartesian 
plane that the player can navigate and those that he cannot, in addition to the points 
where the towers are located. The map also identifies the start and end points of the 
enemies’ trajectories. In addition, the characteristics named on the map vary according 
to the different levels of the game. The map uses a graphic representation in order 
to identify the areas that can be navigated and those that cannot.  

The enemies, the player pointer and the towers all  have  specific positions on the 
Cartesian plane, and are represented graphically and also  have corresponding sound 
effects in order to provide feedback regarding their location and actions. The enemies 
also  have  an  associated  direction  and  speed  regarding  their  movement  through  the 
map, as well as an energy value (which must be higher than zero for them to be alive). 
On the other hand, the towers have a damage value (corresponding to the diminished 
value of the enemies’ energy when they are shot), a reach value (which is the maximum 
distance to  which a tower can attack the enemies), and shot direction towards 
the closest enemy.  

 

528 

M. Espinoza, J. Sánc

chez, and M. de Borba Campos 

 

Fig. 1. Modes of navigation (A
Priority Navigation 

A) Free Navigation, (B) X Axis Priority Navigation,  (C) Y A

Axis 

The levels of the game a
excluding  the  (0,  0)  point. 
level  are  determined,  such 
mies’ trajectories, the point
by the player, and the point
player installs the tower) de
as the end point for the play
important to point out that 
the starting point (0, 0). In 
mode of navigation for the
through space. The followin
•  Free Navigation. Here th

are determined based on the points on the Cartesian pla
Based  on  these  points,  various  significant  aspects  of 
as:  the  characteristics  of  the  map,  the  points  of  the  e
ts that can be navigated and those that cannot be naviga
ts where the player can install towers. This point (where 
etermines the end point of the enemies’ trajectory, as w
yer’s navigation. The end point is defined as (Xf, Yf). I
both the enemies and the player begin their navigation
addition, a further characteristic was added, establishin
e player through the map, restricting his or her navigat
ng options are available to the player (Figure 1): 

ane, 
the 
eneated 

the 
well 
It is 
n at 
ng a 
tion 

he player can move freely through the area determined

d by 

(0, 0) and (Xf, Yf). 

•  X Axis Priority Navigati
the player can navigate t
the navigation can contin
points.  

•  Y Axis Priority Navigati
the player can navigate t
the navigation can contin
points.  

ion. The player can move down a restricted path. Initia
the path determined by the (0, 0) and (Xf, 0) points. La
nue down the path determined by the (Xf, 0) and (Xf, 

ally, 
ater, 
Yf) 

ion. The player can move down a restricted path. Initia
the path determined by the (0, 0) and (Yf, 0) points. La
nue down the path determined by the (Yf, 0) and (Xf, 

ally, 
ater, 
Yf) 

An additional characteristic
Axis Priority Navigation m
the previous point, once the

c was added, which can be configured in both the X and
modes. This characteristic consists of blocking the return
e player has advanced. This makes the path uni-direction

d Y 
n to 
nal. 

2.2 

Interfaces 

In  order  to  play,  the  learn
actions  such  as:  move  abo

ner  uses  a  Wiimote  control,  which  allows  him  to  exec
out,  obtain  clues,  and  install  towers  within  the  game.  T

cute 
The 

 

  Videogaming Interaction for Mental Model Construction in Learners Who Are Blind 

529 

videogame includes 3 interfaces: (i) an audio interface, which provides all of the information 
related to carrying out actions and the status of the game; (ii) a haptic interface,
 which provides feedback associated with movements that are blocked within the 
game  through  the  vibration  of  the  Wiimote;  and  (iii)  a  graphic  interface,  which  is 
presented in high contrast (black and white) on the screen, so that users with low levels 
of vision can visualize the map and the various elements of the game. 

The videogame provides the user with feedback related to the various actions that 
are taken as a result of the interaction. This feedback is provided through audio cues 
that  can  be  either  spoken,  stereo  iconic  sound,  or  spatialized  iconic  sounds.  Haptic 
feedback  is  also  provided  through  the  vibration  of  the  Wiimote.  In  sum,  feedback 
related to the following events in the videogame was incorporated: 
•  When  the  player  moves  from  cell  to  cell  along  a  navigable  path  (stereo  iconic 

sound). 

•  When  the  videogame  blocks  a  player’s  movement  towards  a  non-navigable  area 

(stereo iconic sound and Wiimote vibration).  

•  When the player installs a tower (stereo iconic sound).  
•  When the towers shoot at the enemies (spatial iconic sound). 
•  When the enemies move (spatial iconic sound). 
•  When the  videogame automatically provides instructions or relevant information, 

or when the player requests information (sound with spoken texts).  

3 

Usability Evaluation 

Two  prototypes  (initial  and  final  prototype)  were  iteratively  created,  and  were  subjected 
to usability evaluations by the end users, who used the videogame in the context 
of a set of defined tasks. The objective of the usability evaluation was to adjust, 
improve  and  validate  the  interfaces  proposed  for  the  videogame.  The  methodology 
utilized is presented in the following. 

3.1 

Sample 

The sample of end users consisted of 7 learners who are blind (3 female and 4 male) 
between 9 and 13 years of age, from the Hellen Keller School in Santiago, Chile. The 
sample was divided up into two groups, in which group 1 consisted of an 11-year-old 
girl and a 9-year-old boy, and group 2 included two girls and three boys, between 9 
and  13  years  of  age.  Having  had  prior  experience  using  similar  products  was  not  a 
prerequisite to make up part of the sample.  

The learners included in the sample correspond to videogame end users. For this 
reason  their  participation  in  the  usability  evaluation  represents  a  direct  contribution 
for improving the design of the application, further adjusting its needs, and validating 
the videogame interfaces.   

 

530 

M. Espinoza, J. Sánchez, and M. de Borba Campos 

3.2 

Instruments 

An adaptation of the end-user and facilitator questionnaire for software usability [12] 
was used. The original questionnaire consisted of 18 statements that the user has to 
evaluate on a  scale between  1 and 10, in  which 1 is  ‘a little’ and 10 is  ‘a lot’. The 
adaptations  were  made  by  changing  the  word  “software”  to  “videogame”  in  the 
statements included in the questionnaire. The statements were classified into the following 
dimensions, according to the user’s perception regarding the interface: “Satis-
faction”, “Learning”, “Control and Use”, and “Sounds”. In addition, the questionnaire 
included a section with 5 open questions (just as in the original questionnaire), and as 
in  the  case  of  the  sentences,  the  only  change  was  to  include  the  word  ‘videogame’ 
instead of the word ‘software’. However, 5 additional questions were added. The first 
added  question  was:  “Did  you  like  the  joystick?  Why  or  why  not?”.  This  question 
sought to obtain the level of the user’s satisfaction with the use of the Wiimote. The 
following  4  added  questions  were:  “Did  you  understand  the  videogame’s  instruc-
tions?”, “Did the videogame  help  you to  move around?”, “How did  you use the instructions 
 in  order  to  move  around?”,  and  “Did  the  joystick’s  vibration  help  you  to 
move around?”. These questions aimed to measure the learner’s perception and satisfaction 
 regarding  the  mechanisms  of  interaction,  and  the  transfer  of  information 
needed to be able to play the game.   

3.3  Tasks 

Two sets of tasks were established. The first set of tasks consisted of three different 
levels [(5, 5), (5, 6), and (5, -6)], all of which included the ability to return to the previous 
cell, and with an X-axis Priority over the Y-axis. This is a minimal set of tasks 
that  allowed  researchers  to  observe  the  learner’s  behavior  when  playing  the  videogame.
 The second set of tasks consisted of 3 sets with 4 levels: (5, 4), (5, -4), (-5, 4), 
and  (-5,  -4).  The  first  subset  of  tasks  included  navigation  without  being  able  to  go 
backwards,  and  with  priority  of  the  X-axis  over  the  Y-axis.  The  second  subset  included 
navigation without being able to go backwards, and with priority given to the 
Y-axis over the X-axis. The third subset included free navigation.  

3.4 

Procedure 

First,  researchers  worked  individually  with  each  learner  in  Group  1  of  the  sample, 
explaining the basic premise of the game. The various devices that were to be utilized 
were presented: headphones, the Wiimote control and the Nunchuk. The actions that 
can be taken in the game were summarized, as well as the buttons that can be used on 
the Wiimote control. It is worth highlighting that the learners were asked to explore 
the  entry  interface,  and  not  every  single  button  was  explained  to  them.  They  were 
instructed to discover the various actions that they could take with the buttons themselves.
 The first set of tasks was configured on the initial videogame prototype, and 
the players began to play the videogame. Once the tasks had been completed, the end 
user usability questionnaire was applied.  

 

  Videogaming Interaction for Mental Model Construction in Learners Who Are Blind 

531 

During a second stage, researchers worked individually with all of the learners from 
group 2 of the sample. First, the game was explained to them. The devices that would be 
used were also presented: headphones and the Wiimote control. The various actions that 
could  be  taken  in  the  game  were  explained,  but  the  corresponding  buttons  were  not 
explained. The second set of tasks was configured sequentially for the final prototype of 
the game. In this way, the learners were able to start up and play the videogame. Once 
the tasks had been completed, the end user questionnaire was applied.  

3.5  Results 

In quantitative terms, increments between the initial prototype and the final prototype 
were observed regarding the means of all of the dimensions of the end user evalua-
tion: Satisfaction (Initial prototype mean = 7.42; Final prototype mean = 9.77), Learning 
 (Initial  prototype  mean  =  5.00;  Final  prototype  mean  =  6.90),  Control  and  Use 
(Initial  prototype  mean  =  4.38;  Final  prototype  mean  =  9.00),  and  Sounds  (Initial 
prototype mean = 5.50; Final prototype mean = 8.67). 

Researchers went into more depth regarding the statistical significance of the differences 
observed between the two means. First, a T-test for independent samples was 
run with the values obtained for the different dimensions, based on the users’ evaluations 
of the second prototype and the final prototype. From this test, it was observed 
that the increase in the mean scores for the “Sounds” dimension (t = -2.942, p < 0.05) 
was statistically significant. The increases in the means for the other dimensions were 
not observed to be statistically significant.   

Qualitatively, the users’ appreciation improved notoriously for the final prototype. 
The learners expressed a clear level of acceptance regarding how fun the game is, its 
elements, the use of the controls, and the mechanisms for providing information. All 
of these were aspects that were criticized for the initial prototype, and were then improved 
and validated for the final prototype. One aspect worth pointing out regarding 
the  results  obtained  from  the  open-ended  questions  is  the  unanimous  acceptance  of 
the Wiimote control. All of the users liked this control, as it is easy to use and helped 
them to move around in the game.  

4 

Cognitive Impact Evaluation 

Once the final videogame prototype had been created, following the redesigns based 
on the results of the previous usability evaluations, a cognitive impact evaluation of 
the  videogame  was  performed.  The  methodology  utilized  and  the  results  obtained 
from this process are described below.  

4.1 

Sample 

The  sample  was  made  up  of  4  visually  impaired  learners  from  the  Hellen  Keller 
School of Ñuñoa, in Santiago de Chile (2 boys and 2 girls), between 9 and 13 years of 
age. The learners from this sample had previously participated in the final prototype 
usability evaluation.  

 

532 

M. Espinoza, J. Sánchez, and M. de Borba Campos 

 

 

Fig. 2. Learners playing the game 

4.2 

Instruments 

The instrument of evaluation was integrated as part of the videogame, through the log 
files  that  recorded  the  actions  performed  by  the  users.  In  processing  the  videogame 
log files for each level that the player had completed, records were obtained regarding 
the number of steps taken (Ne), and the number of optimal steps needed to pass the 
level (No). From these records, the efficiency indicator (E) was defined as: 

 

E = No / Ne 

With this indicator, a quantitative mean for the progressive construction of the learn-
ers’ mental maps was obtained. The paths in the game lead to a final destination, and 
the  learner  was  free  to  choose  the  best  strategy  for  reaching  that  destination.  These 
decisions are reflected in the efficiency indicator.  

4.3  Tasks 

Twenty levels were considered for the tasks: (3, 3), (3, -3), (-3, 3), (-3, -3), (4, 4), (4, -
4), (-4, 4), (-4, -4), (5, 3), (5, -3), (-5, 3), (-5, -3), (5, 4), (5, -4), (-5, 4), (-5, -4), (5, 5), 
(5, -5), (-5, 5), y (-5, -5). Afterwards, 3 sets of tasks were determined. First, for the 
pretest  tasks,  the  free  navigation  modality  was  configured  for  all  the  levels  considered.
 Following the development tasks, the X-Axis Priority navigation mode without 
being able to go backwards was configured for all of the levels considered. Finally, 
for the post-test tasks, the free navigation mode was configured for all of the levels 
considered. 

4.4 

Procedure 

Researchers  worked  individually  with  all  of  the  learners  in  the  sample.  The  main 
premise of the game was explained, and they were given instructions on how to use 
the  devices  for  interacting  with  the  game  (headphones  and  Wiimote).  The  actions 

 

  Videogaming Interaction for Mental Model Construction in Learners Who Are Blind 

533 

available within the game and the associated buttons were also explained. The sets of 
tasks for the videogame were configured sequentially, as each learner completed the 
tasks required by the videogame.  

Each  learner  completed  each  of  the  3  sets  of  tasks  in  successive  work  sessions. 
Each of these sessions lasted for approximately 15 minutes. For each set of tasks, the 
learner played individually  with the  videogame, until he  was able to pass the levels 
involved in each game. Once the sets of tasks had been completed by all of the users, 
the records obtained in the log files were analyzed.  

4.5  Results 

The  total  efficiency  was  determined  for  each  user,  considering  the  total  numbers  of 
steps taken. The total efficiency indicator increased between the pretest and post-test 
for all learners in the sample (pretest mean = 75.74%, post-test mean = 85.75%). In 
order to further research these results, a T test for related samples was performed. The 
results showed that the difference in the total efficiency means (meaning the increase 
in  the  total  efficiency  mean  between  the  pretest  and  the  post-test)  was  statistically 
significant (t = -3.198, p < 0.05). 

5 

Discussion 

As  a  result  of  this  study  a  videogame  was  designed  and  developed  for  visually  
impaired  learners,  allowing  them  to  learn  as  well  as  interpret  points  on  a  twodimensional 
 plane,  and  to  apply  their  knowledge  directly  within  a  system  of  references.
 The final videogame operates within a limited 2D plane, with X and Y values 
ranging in whole numbers between [-10, 10]. In this way, it is important to point out 
that the solution can be scaled up to more extensive planes.  

The iterative cycle of design, implementation and usability evaluation led to the generation 
of the final videogame prototype, for which all of the designed and implemented 
characteristics  were  validated  by  the  end  users.  The  final  prototype  was  clearly  wellaccepted 
by the end users, which is reflected in the quantitative data corresponding to 
the  “Satisfaction”,  “Control  and  Use”  and  “Sounds”  dimensions,  as  well  as  from  the 
answers to the open-ended questions, which were generally very positive.  

One interesting result obtained regarding usability pertains to the modest level of 
satisfaction  obtained  for  the  “Learning”  dimension,  which  can  be  interpreted  as  the 
user not perceiving that he or she is actually learning anything. This result is complemented 
by the opinions of the learners that they had fun playing the videogame. Taken 
 together,  these  two  aspects  are  quite  positive  when  it  comes  to  motivating  the 
learners to work with the game.  

Regarding  the  cognitive  impact  evaluation,  the  increase  in  the  total  efficiency  
of  blind  learners  when  performing  the  cognitive  tasks,  points  to  the  fact  that  the  
videogame allows users to gradually construct a mental map. This occurs through the 
 

 

534 

M. Espinoza, J. Sánchez, and M. de Borba Campos 

interpretation and use of the information that the game provides, which is used at first 
to locate oneself on the Cartesian plane, after  which users  were able to  utilize their 
own strategies to complete the levels by reaching the destination points. Although the 
number  of  users  in  the  sample  was  low,  and  the  extension  of  the  two-dimensional 
planes  was  limited,  the  results  showed  that  using  the  established  working  modality, 
positive changes were produced regarding the desired skills.   

6 

Conclusions 

The purpose of this work was to present the design, development and evaluation of a 
videogame  that  allows  users  who  are  blind  to  gradually  build  up  a  mental  model 
based  on  references  between  different  points  on  a  Cartesian  plane,  in  a  way  that  is 
both didactic and entertaining. The objective of the research was fulfilled. A tool was 
designed and developed for blind users, allowing them to gradually construct a mental 
reference model based on an association between points on a two-dimensional plane. 
The videogame implicitly integrated the interpretation of points on a Cartesian plane. 
In addition, as part of the tasks, learners applied their knowledge towards orientation 
within the integrated system of references built into the videogame.  

The usability evaluations allowed researchers to detect problems and generate new 
requirements  for redesigning  the  videogame. This allowed  researchers to adjust and 
improve the interfaces in the following prototype, in addition to validating aspects of 
the  interfaces  that  had  been  designed  and  implemented.  All  of  these  changes  were 
made by taking the perspective of the end user into account.  

Regarding  the  cognitive  impact  evaluation,  the  desired  skills  to  be  developed  by 
the learners were those related to the interpretation of points on a Cartesian plane, and 
to knowledge applied within the system of references established by the videogame.  

For future work, it is proposed to work with a larger sample and to apply further 
and  more complete cognitive impact evaluations. It is also proposed to increase the 
scope of the tasks that users perform, and to explore other ways of evaluating cognition.
 Such measurements could be through the application of the knowledge gained in 
a  real  life  context,  or  through  their  application  to  daily  activities  performed  by  the 
blind users.  

Acknowledgments. This report was funded by the Chilean National Fund of Science 
and Technology, Fondecyt #1120330, and Project CIE-05 Program Center Education 
PBCT-Conicyt.  It  was  also  supported  by  the  Program  STIC-AmSud-CAPES/ 
CONICYT/MAEE,  Project  KIGB-Knowing  and  Interacting  while  Gaming  for  the 
Blind, 2014. 

 

  Videogaming Interaction for Mental Model Construction in Learners Who Are Blind 

535 

References 

1.  Abu Doush, I., Pontelli, E., Son, T., Simon, D., Ma, O.: Multimodal Presentation of TwoDimensional 
 Charts:  An  Investigation  Using  Open  Office  XML  and  Microsoft  Excel. 
ACM Trans. Access. Comput. 3(2), Article 8, 50 pages (2010) 

2.  Bernareggi, C., Comaschi, C., Marcante, A., Mussio, P., Provenza, L., Vanzi, S.: A multimodal 
 interactive  system  to  create  and  explore  graph  structures. In:  CHI 2008  Extended 
Abstracts  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems  (CHI  EA  2008),  pp.  2697–2702. 
ACM, New York (2008) 

3.  Crossan, A., Brewster, S.: Multimodal Trajectory Playback for Teaching Shape Information 
 and  Trajectories  to  Visually  Impaired  Computer  Users.  ACM  Trans.  Access.  Comput.
 1(2), Article 12, 34 pages (2008) 

4.  Davison, B.: Evaluating auditory graphs with blind students in a classroom. SIGACCESS 

Access. Comput. 102, 4–7 (2012) 

5.  Goncu,  C.,  Marriott,  K.:  GraVVITAS:  Generic  multi-touch  presentation  of  accessible 
graphics.  In:  Campos,  P.,  Graham,  N.,  Jorge,  J.,  Nunes,  N.,  Palanque,  P.,  Winckler,  M. 
(eds.) INTERACT 2011, Part I. LNCS, vol. 6946, pp. 30–48. Springer, Heidelberg (2011) 
6.  Jagdish, D., Sawhney, R., Gupta, M., Nangia, S.: Sonic Grid: an auditory interface for the 
visually impaired to navigate GUI-based environments. In: Proceedings of the 13th International 
 Conference  on  Intelligent  User  Interfaces  (IUI  2008),  pp. 337–340.  ACM,  New 
York (2008) 

7.  Kim, D., Lim, Y.: Handscope: enabling blind people to experience statistical graphics on 
websites through haptics. In: Proceedings of the 2011 Annual Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems (CHI 2011), pp. 2039–2042. ACM, New York (2011) 

8.  Lahav,  O.,  Mioduser,  D.:  Haptic-feedback  support  for  cognitive  mapping  of  unknown 
spaces  by  people  who  are  blind.  International  Journal  Human-Computer  Studies 66(1),  
23–35 (2008) 

9.  Manshad, M., Pontelli, E., Manshad, S.: MICOO (multimodal interactive cubes for object 
orientation): a tangible user interface for the blind and visually impaired. In: Proc. of the 
13th  International  ACM  SIGACCESS  Conference  on  Computers  and  Accessibility 
(ASSETS 2011), pp. 261–262. ACM, New York (2011) 

10.  McGookin, D., Robertson, E., Brewster, S.: Clutching at straws: using tangible interaction 
to provide non-visual access to graphs. In: Proc. of the 28th International Conference on 
Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems  (CHI  2010),  pp.  1715–1724.  ACM,  New  York 
(2010) 

11.  Petit,  G.,  Dufresne,  A.,  Levesque,  V.,  Hayward,  V.,  Trudeau,  N.:  Refreshable  tactile 
graphics applied to schoolbook illustrations for students with visual impairment. In: Proc. 
of the 10th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility 
(Assets 2008), pp. 89–96. ACM, New York (2008) 

12.  Sánchez, J.: End-user and facilitator questionnaire for Software Usability. Usability evaluation 
test. University of Chile, Santiago, Chile (2003) 

13.  Sanchez, J.: Recognizing shapes and gestures using sound as feedback. In: Proceedings of 
the 28th of the International Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI EA 2010), pp. 3063–3068. ACM, New York (2010) 

14.  Sánchez, J.: Development of navigation skills through audio haptic videogaming in learners 
who are blind. In: Proc. 4th Intl. Conf. on Software Development for Enhancing Accessibility 
and Fighting Info-Exclusion (DSAI 2012). Procedia Computer Science, vol. 14, 
pp. 102–110 (2012) 

 

536 

M. Espinoza, J. Sánchez, and M. de Borba Campos 

15.  Sánchez, J., Mascaró, J.: Audiopolis, navigation through a virtual city using audio and haptic 
interfaces for people who are blind. In: Stephanidis, C. (ed.) Universal Access in HCI, 
Part II, HCII 2011. LNCS, vol. 6766, pp. 362–371. Springer, Heidelberg (2011) 

16.  Sánchez, J., Espinoza, M., Garrido, J.: Videogaming for wayfinding skills in children who 
are blind. In: Sharkey, P.M., Klinger, E. (eds.) Proc. 9th Intl Conf. on Disability, Virtual 
Reality and Assoc. Technologies, Laval, France, September 10-12, pp. 131–140 (2012) 

17.  Xu, C., Israr, A., Poupyrev, I., Bau, O., Harrison, C.: Tactile display for the visually impaired 
using TeslaTouch. In: Proc. of the 2011 Annual Conference Extended Abstracts on 
Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems  (CHI  EA  2011),  pp.  317–322.  ACM,  New  York 
(2011) 

 

