3D Virtual Environments for the Rehabilitation of the 

Blind 

Julio Villane and Jaime Sánchez 

Department of Computer Science, University of Chile 

Blanco Encalada 2120, Santiago, Chile 

{jvillane, jsanchez}@dcc.uchile.cl 

Abstract.  The  accretion  of  orientation  and  mobility  skills  in  blind  people  is 
fundamental  for  the  development  of  an  independent  life.  To  these  ends,  
activities oriented towards reinforcing this line of knowledge require direct interactions 
 with  spaces  in  real  places,  and  the  assistance  of  an  educator  or  a 
companion as well. The objective of this study  was to design, implement and 
evaluate 3D virtual environments in order to evaluate orientation and mobility 
learning in an unfamiliar environment based on the use of such environments. 
The  procedure  was  provided  by  a  learning  stage  in  which  the  user  learned  to 
move  about  in  the  virtual  environments,  followed  by  an  interaction  stage  in 
which  he/she  traveled  virtually  through  the  environments,  to  then  travel  the  
virtual  environments  that  had  been  navigated  virtually  in  the  real  world.  To 
simulate the virtual surroundings, Unreal Engine was used, which is a gaming 
engine  that  allows  for  the  construction  of  scenarios  through  a  graphic  editor. 
The results obtained show that the users were able to run the established route 
without any difficulties, for which reason it can be established that it is possible 
to produce mental models of real places through virtual interactions guided only 
by auditory cues.  

1   Introduction 

Currently there are a wide variety of software applications that seek to achieve different 
 objectives  for  their  end  users  by  simulating  real-world  surroundings  through  a 
virtual environment. The objectives of such applications run from the design of buildings 
prior to their construction, to animation with communicational ends such as photographs 
and film shorts (also used to make commercials and movies), all the way to 
merely recreational ends.  

The simulation of real environments has been especially useful in industries where 
practice  in  the  real-world  environment  could  mean  immeasurable  monetary  investments 
or a potential risk for the loss of human life [9]. It is in this way that applications 
 of  this  kind  are  used  for  learning  [10],  such  as  the  training  of  commercial  
airplane pilots, control tower operators in airports, or even for military training.    

In  this  line  of  use,  the  applications  that  focus  on  recreational  ends  have  evolved 
greatly over the last decade, on par with progress in technology, and are reaching a 
great degree of similarity with reality [9].  

C. Stephanidis (Ed.): Universal Access in HCI, Part III, HCII 2009, LNCS 5616 pp. 246–255, 2009. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009 

 

3D Virtual Environments for the Rehabilitation of the Blind 

247 

In addition, applications have been built that assist with the process of building these 
virtual  environments,  and  which  according  to  the  specifications  of  the  requirements 
and/or intentions of the user, allow them to be constructed flexibly by manipulating and 
controlling a large number of variables in a simplified way.  

One matter that could seem to be absolutely tangential to virtual environments is 
that  having  to  do  with  disabled  people,  and  particularly  children  and  young  people 
with visual disabilities. Such people are currently excluded to a certain degree from 
the use of applications based on virtual environments; however there are several projects 
that have been developed that consider them as a whole within the content their 
study [2], [3], [6], [8]. 

The objective of this study was to design, implement and evaluate 3D virtual environments,
  in  order  to  evaluate  orientation  and  mobility  learning  in  an  unfamiliar  
environment based on the use of such virtual environments.  

2   Related Work 

The majority of computer games that have been developed are concerned with achieving 
a sense of realism for the player through graphic resources. This often translates 
into a notable image quality achieved by the quality of the details that technology is 
able to generate.  

To incorporate virtual reality technology for use by blind users, a new kind of interface 
must be proposed that is completely different from the kind of visual interface 
we are used to.  

In  the  case  of  blind  users,  particularly  children,  the  software  must  be  built  with 
mainly  audio-based  interfaces,  tactile  interactions  or,  in  the  case  of  users  with  low 
vision, simple graphic representations with a high level of color contrast [13]. From 
the work developed by Eriksson and Gärdenfors [6], it is possible to deduce that there 
are design patterns in the interfaces  for blind  users based on  which  it is possible to 
develop software that allows for them to move about fluidly. 

In analyzing the work of Loge et al. [7] we can establish that it is possible to produce 
software that allows blind users to develop orientation and mobility skills through 
the  identification  of  sounds  and  the  location  and  following  of  different  auditory 
sources.  

In the multimedia software called “Theo and Seth’s Farm [8], spatial sound is used, 
stimulating mathematics learning in blind children. Through the use of metaphors in 
the  different  software  environments,  children  are  able  to  interact  with  different 
mathematical operations and content, producing a constructive degree of learning. 

In both applications the usability and cognitive impact on the users were evaluated, 

observing relevant changes in terms of mathematical knowledge.  

In  this  same  line  of  work  and  on  line  with  advances  in  technology,  various  programs 
 with  different  motivations  have  been  developed  that  simulate  a  reality,  with 
which  one  or  several  users  interact  and  receive  responses  very  similar  to  what  one 
could receive in reality [14].   

Rizzo [1] presents a summary of a series of studies that were carried out, based on 
the perspective of how the growing popularity of digital video games and the immense 
progress in terms of graphic and audio realism has been able to create virtual realities 
that  are  quite  interactive  and  addictive.  In  particular,  a  study  is  presented  that  deals 

248 

J. Villane and J. Sánchez 

with the treatment of mental health patients and rehabilitation, in which it was noted 
that young-adult patients with traumatic brain damage who had a hard time performing 
cognitive rehabilitation tasks could easily spend several hours in a row playing the PC 
game “SimCity”. These observations suggest that the design of virtual reality applications 
oriented towards clinical treatment could be favored by examining the formulas 
that  the  designers  of  successful,  interactive,  digital  video  games  used,  paying  close 
attention to the flow and variation of the stimuli produced during the game, which is 
also connected to a progressive objective and a reward-based structure [1]. 

Based on these studies, applications have been developed that involve one or more 
attributes of those previously mentioned for: Exposure therapy, focused on war veterans 
with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), distraction from pain for children that 
receive some kind of painful treatment and/or chemotherapy, motor-skills rehabilitation 
for people  with some kind of dysfunction in their central nervous system (apoplexy 
and brain damage), and the evaluation and cognitive/functional entertainment of 
children with attention deficit disorders, Down syndrome and/or social anxiety [11]. 

There  are  currently  some  applications  that  use  sound-based  virtual  reality  as  the 
basis for interaction with a blind user [12]. For example, AudioChile [2] was a project 
with  the  main  objective  of  designing,  implementing  and  evaluating  a  Role  Playing 
Game (RPG)-type multimedia application. This was a 3D spatial sound virtual environment 
 application  for  blind  users.  Through  this  application,  problem  solving  by 
means of planning strategies, such as random searching, trial and error and systematic 
searching, were analyzed. Based on the conclusions of this project, it was possible to 
point  out  that  the  systematic  use  of  the  software,  supported  by  the  methodological 
orientation of cognitive tasks, allows blind users to apply skills that help with problem 
solving. In addition, the impact of the AudioChile software on the students with visual 
disabilities indicated that several of them could anticipate  problems, plan and apply 
different problem-solving strategies, as well as explain the strategy they used to solve 
the problems proposed by the software, and apply it in other contexts.  

3   Evaluation 

3.1   Sample 

Nine users from the Hellen Keller School for the Blind in Santiago, Chile whose ages 
fluctuated between 12 and 18 years old participated in the study. Five of them have 
been diagnosed with total blindness, and four with low vision. Among the five totally 
blind users, two were female and the rest (including the low vision users) were male.  
In addition, it was required that the users had developed abilities for moving about 
independently  prior  to  their  participation,  and  that  they  had  no  knowledge  of  the 
structure of the Universidad de Chile metro station, which was the scenario modeled 
for this study.  

3.2   UnrealEd Software  

The  software  used  for  the  implementation  of  this  study  corresponds  to  the  graphic 
editor UnrealEd (see Fig. 1), which belongs to the Unreal Engine 2 [4], [5], an engine 
for  PC  games  and  video  game  consoles  created  by  the  company  Epic  Games.  This 

 

 

3D Virtual Environments for the Rehabilitation of the Blind 

249 

Fig. 1. Screenshot of the UnrealEd software 

 

engine emerged from its implementation in a game called Unreal (created in the year 
1998), and which then became the base of many games, particularly those pertaining 
to the ROL genre with a third person perspective. 

Based  on  the  use  of  UnrealEd,  multiple  scenarios  with  varying  degrees  of  complexity 
can be designed, which also involve different interactive elements that can be 
included. Such elements include: reproduction of sounds when the user is in a certain 
area  of  the  scenario,  review  of  conditions,  activation  of  the  movements  of  objects 
such as doors or others with which the user can interact. 

3.3   Methodology 

The methodology used consisted of a preparatory stage and three stages for learning 
the virtual environment. In all the stages the user interacted with the system. 

In the Preparatory stage (see Fig. 2A), an initial approach to the users’ interaction 
with  the  software  was  established,  which  allows  the  user  to  confirm  and  evaluate 
assumptions and over which the following stages were developed. To these ends, two 
low-level complexity scenarios were designed in which there were 3 rooms connected 
by hallways. The user started out in one of the three rooms, and had to find the hallways 
that guided him/her to the other rooms through the use of auditory cues. Sounds 
were placed at the point of entry for the connections between the rooms and the hallways,
 so that the user was able to identify the connections (as possible alternatives in 
choosing  his/her  path).  In  addition,  sounds  that  indicate  the  direction  in  which  the 
hallway leads were included, making use of the engine’s special sound capacity, in a 
way that would orient the user both in terms of depth and direction.  

The  Simple  Interaction  stage  (see  Fig.  2B)  was  held  during  approximately  one 
week and a  half, in three separate sessions. In this stage an interaction  with a  more 
complex environment than the previous stage was established. For this the upper level 
of the Universidad de Chile metro station was chosen, which makes up a part of the 
Metro system in Santiago de Chile. This station was chosen because of its centrality, 
given  the  flux  of  people  that  travel  through  it  daily  and  the  commercial  and  civic 
sector that surrounds it, such as bank branches, commercial stores of all kinds, corporate 
buildings and educational institutions. The scenario corresponded to a simplified 
version of the  upper level of  the  metro station, basically reduced to hallways, stairs 
and ticket booths.  

250 

J. Villane and J. Sánchez 

                                     (a)                            (b)                           (c) 

  

  

 

  
                                                                   (d) 

 

Fig.  2.  Stages  of  the  Intervention.  (a).  Preparatory  stage,  (b).  Simple  Interaction  stage,  (c). 
Interaction by Levels stage, (d). Application stage. 

The Interaction by Levels stage (see Fig. 2C) corresponded to the user’s interaction 
with an even more complex environment, using the upper and intermediate levels 
of  the  Universidad  de  Chile  metro  station.  This  stage  was  carried  out  through  6  
separate sessions held during a period of 3 weeks.   

Finally, the Application stage (see Fig. 2D) corresponded to the practical application 
of the mental model formed from the previous interactions with the virtual environments.
 This stage was held in one session during one single week. For this session, 
each  of  the  users  was  asked  to  run  a  route  through  the  Universidad  de  Chile  metro 
station as independently as possible. 

Finally, the auditory feedback for these scenarios was centered on the user’s position 
through the use of cardinal points and the identification of each hallway as a way 
of facilitating the user in locating his/herself.  

3.4   Instruments 

The evaluation instruments used were developed especially for this research project, 
and consisted of user performance guidelines for each task performed during the four 
stages, establishing 5 levels of achievement: 1. Is not able to perform the task, 2. Is 
able to perform the task, but with difficulty and is not able to describe the path taken 
or the diagram of the scenario, 3. Is able to perform the task but is not able to describe 
the  diagram  of  the  scenario  entirely,  4.  Performs  the  task  adequately  and  is  able  to 
verbally and accurately explain the route taken, and 5. Performs the task adequately 
and  is  able  to  verbally  explain  the  route  taken  and  the  position  of  the  music  boxes 
within the scenario.  

 

3D Virtual Environments for the Rehabilitation of the Blind 

251 

Fig. 3. Diagrams of the scenarios used in the preparatory stage 

 

3.5   Procedure 

In the preparatory stage, the evaluation was developed on the basis of two scenarios. 
These scenarios were designed in a way to evaluate the fluidity of the users’ movements 
through them, as guided only by the audio stimuli. In these scenarios the users 
could recognize hallway  intersections (in order to evaluate if the users cover all the 
alternative routes correctly during the interaction) and movement cycles, which is to 
say that a series of movements between the hallways and the rooms could bring the 
user back to the same point of origin (see Fig. 3). 

The preparatory stage was divided into 3 steps: in the first step the user had to interact 
 with  the  scenario  freely,  discovering  the  different  sounds  that  guided  his/her 
movements,  with  the  help  of  an  assistant.  Then,  the  user  had  to  search  for  2  music 
boxes located in different places  within the scenario. Finally, once the  music boxes 
had been found, the user had to represent the movement he/she had made in the scenario,
 as well as the positions of the music boxes. This was done through the use of a 
model of the scenario made of solid material, in order to verify the degree to which 
the user had understood the entire scenario. 

The simple interaction stage was designed to evaluate the interaction with a more 
complex  scenario.  To  these  ends,  the  first  underground  floor  of  the  Universidad  de 
Chile metro station was used (see Fig. 4). 

The methodology used in this stage was based on 3 steps. In the first step, the user 
interacted freely with the virtual environment with the help of the assistant, who introduced 
the  meaning of the  sounds used as  auditory cues in the  scenario. The user 
 

Fig. 4. Diagram of the scenario used in the simple interaction stage 

 

 

252 

J. Villane and J. Sánchez 

Fig. 5. Diagram of the scenario used in the Interaction by Levels stage 

 

had to travel through the scenario and locate the different sectors and exits within it. 
These sectors were identified through textual phrases that are reproduced when entering 
into them, or passing near to them. In the second step, the user had to take various 
routes (between 4 and 6) from a certain departure point to a specific destination without 
the aide of the assistant. Finally, in the last step the user had to represent his/her 
movements mentally, provided the point of departure, and using the classification of 
the sectors established in the virtual scenario. 

Through this we sought to verify if, through the use of the software, the user had been 
able to represent the scenario and the route traveled by using the corresponding terminology 
 (name  of  the  hallways  and  the  cardinal  points)  utilized  in  the  construction  of  the 
scenario. 

In the interaction by levels stage, the first underground level of the Universidad de 
Chile metro station scenario was extended to include another floor, corresponding to a 
simplified  version  of  the  second  underground  level  of  the  station  (see  Fig.  5).  The 
user could travel through this new, more complete scenario, identifying its principal 
structure,  the  position  of  the  ticket  booths  and  the  turnstiles  through  which  he/she 
would access the metro platform during the real interaction. 

The auditory feedback followed the same line as it had on the upper floor, guiding 
the user’s position through auditory cues that  make reference to cardinal points and 
identifying  the  important  sectors  of  the  level.  The  methodology  established  for  this 
stage was identical to the previous stage. 

Finally, in the application stage, the methodology consisted of 2 parts. In the first 
part the user traveled a route by making use of the software, in which all the important 
elements of immersion in the scenario were involved, such as exits, ticket booth hallways 
and entry points into the metro. Once completed, the user was taken to the Universidad 
de Chile metro station, where he/she traveled the same route through the use 
of his/her cane and the representation established through the use of the software. 

4   Results 

In the testing of the first scenario, it was found that the association of sounds used was 
not  clear  for  the  users,  as  only  25%  of  the  tests  applied  had  favorable  results.  By 
changing and restructuring the auditory cues, we were able to improve these results to 
80% achievement for sound association.  

 

3D Virtual Environments for the Rehabilitation of the Blind 

253 

In the second scenario the users were able to travel fluidly through the scenario and 
quickly  found  the  location  of  the  music  boxes.  The  auditory  cues  were  widely  accepted 
 by  the  users.  Some  80%  of  the  tests  applied  resulted  in  a  highly  positive 
evaluation.  

In the simple interaction stage, the auditory cue feedback was improved even more 
by using the cardinal points as references both in the denomination of hallways and 
relevant places  within the scenario. In this  way, a  more complex  scenario ended up 
being easily assimilated by the end users. The users’ movements through the scenario 
were  quite  fluid,  and  their  mental  representations  were  quite  similar  to  reality.  The 
results obtained included 57% of the tests with perfect scores, and the remaining 43% 
were able to pass the tests adequately.  

In the interaction by levels stage, the users were able to move about without any 
problems  between  both  levels  in  the  scenario,  emulating  the  ascent  or  descent  between 
the two through the use of the stairs that connect them. In this stage, a common 
route was established for all the users, in which the starting point corresponded to one 
of the exits of the metro station (located on the upper level of the scenario). They then 
had to get to the ticket booths (on the lower level), and afterwards to the point of entry 
to the platform (also on the lower level), to then finally return to the starting point by 
means of a different route.  

It was observed that the users moved about with a great degree of fluidity by using 
the software. Then, in testing the mental representation the users had made, it was observed 
that they were able to correctly and accurately describe the route and the scenario 
by using the terminology defined in the scenario, supported by the cardinal points.  

This route was also tested in the final application stage, in which the users had to 
make the same movements developed virtually in the interaction by levels stage, but 
this time in the real  world. The results  were absolutely satisfactory, as 100% of the 
users tested were able to successfully travel the route independently. 

5   Conclusions 

The  objective  of  this  study  was  to  design,  implement  and  evaluate  3D  virtual  environments 
in order to evaluate orientation and mobility learning in an unfamiliar environment,
 based on the use of these virtual environments. The model that was created 
in this study corresponds to a continuous model, which implies that it is very difficult 
for the user to repeat his/her exact position when moving about the surroundings. This 
characteristic augments the complexity of navigating the surroundings, as the interaction 
 becomes  closer  to  a  model  that  is  increasingly  true  to  the  reality  of  the  users’ 
real-life routes. 

The Unreal Engine was used to model the development of the scenarios and for the 
construction of the elements that provide auditory cues during travel through the scenario.
 To these ends, the most important components of this tool that could allow for 
the construction of complex scenarios with tasks that are relatively simple were analyzed.
 This tool includes two characteristics that were not evaluated in this study, but 
which are worth mentioning: 1. Development of an application in which several users 
can  interact  simultaneously  within  the  same  scenario  (as  the  Unreal  Engine  can  
manipulate  connections  through  networking)  and  2.  Construction  of  more  visually 

254 

J. Villane and J. Sánchez 

attractive scenarios, in which there are tasks that can be developed together by both 
sighted and blind users simultaneously.  

The scenarios for the testing stage were developed on the basis of a simplification 
of the Universidad de Chile metro station. For this reason, the evaluation was oriented 
not only towards the construction of a mental model of a scenario that was not useful 
for the users, but that also sought to demonstrate that the users were able to construct 
a mental model that allowed them to move about more fluidly through an unfamiliar 
environment by using the software.  

The users that participated in the study were able to establish the virtual route that 
they followed in their mental model. The surroundings built with the UnrealEd tool, 
together  with  the  spatial  audio  cues,  were  enough  to  virtually  emulate  the  chosen 
environment in a way that provided the users with the information necessary for them 
to be able to manage and orient themselves, as well as move about with fluidity. 

Thanks  to  the  use  of  virtual  environments  that  guide  movements  through  spatial 
audio cues, it is possible for users to get to know certain spaces beforehand, prepare 
their  movements  through  them  and,  as  such,  confront  the  real  navigation  for  these 
environments more safely. This training can be developed on a massive scale, without 
necessitating a one-to-one specialist-to-student ratio. Results are achieved in less time 
and with progress made at each user’s pace, being able to repeat the virtual navigation 
however many times is necessary.  

One characteristic that can be deduced from the results obtained in the preparatory 
stage is that the software demands a certain degree of initial learning. This is to say that 
it is necessary to develop initial activities in which the users get to know the program 
and develop skills that will allow them to move about more fluidly within the scenario.  
From this study it was proven that it is possible to apply the use of tools that assist 
with the construction of virtual environments (such as UnrealEd) in order to simulate 
real and relevant environments that can be traveled and assimilated by blind users. 

Currently, the orientation and mobility learning process for blind children is done 
on  site,  in  the  company  and  under  the  supervision  of  a  responsible  educator.  This 
implies a big effort and a lot of time spent on a small number of learners. 

Finally, the use of these virtual reality spaces could allow for blind users to review 
their steps for routes before leaving the  starting point and heading for their destination.
 This would allow for a higher degree of independence and safety while traveling 
the route. As such, through the use of these virtual reality spaces, users will be able to 
get  to  know  many  more  places  by  remote,  without  running  the  risk  of  trying  new 
routes.  Furthermore,  such  exploration  can  be  repeated  as  many  times  as  the  user 
wants, and at any time.   

Acknowledgments. This report was funded by the Chilean National Fund of Science 
and Technology, Fondecyt #1090352 and Project CIE-05 Program Center Education 
PBCT-Conicyt. 

References 

1.  Rizzo, A.: Expose, Distract, Motivate and Measure: Virtual Reality Games for Health. In: 
Sánchez, E.J. (ed.) Nuevas Ideas en Informática Educativa, vol. 2, pp. 1–4. © LOM Ediciones 
(2006) ISBN 956-310-430-7  

 

3D Virtual Environments for the Rehabilitation of the Blind 

255 

2.  Sánchez,  J.,  Sáenz,  M.:  3D  sound  interactive  environments  for  blind  children  problem 

solving skills. Behaviour & Information Technology 25(4), 367–378 (2006a) 

3.  Lumbreras, M., Sánchez, J.: Interactive 3D sound hyperstories for blind children. In: Proceedings 
of the ACM-CHI 1999, Pittsburgh, USA, pp. 318–325 (1999) 

4.  Unreal  Technology,  http://www.unrealtechnology.com/  (last  accessed,  April 

2007) 

5.  Epic Games, http://www.epicgames.com/ (last accessed, April 2007)  
6.  Eriksson, Y., Gärdenfors, D.: Computer games  for children with  visual impairments. In: 
Proceedings of the 5th International conference on Disability, Virtual Reality and Associated 
Technologies, September 20-22, pp. 79–86. New College, Oxford (2004) 

7.  Loge, K., Cram,  A., Inman, D.: Teaching Orientation and Mobility Skills to Blind Children 
Using Computer Generated 3-D Sound Environments. In: Proc. ICAD 2000, Atlanta, 
GA, USA, April 2000, pp. 1–5 (2000) 

8.  Sánchez, J., Sáenz, M.: Developing Mathematics Skills through Audio Interfaces. In: Proceedings 
 of  11th  International  Conference  on  Human-Computer  Interaction,  HCI  2005, 
Las Vegas, Nevada, USA, July 22-27 (2005) 

9.  Hounsell,  M.,  Kemczinski,  A.,  Gasparini,  I.:  Scoring  Strategies  for  an  InstructionistDriven 
 Education-Oriented  Virtual  Environments.  Global  Congress  on  Engineering  and 
Technology Education 1, 499–503 (2005) 

10.  Furness, T., Winn, W., Yu, R.: VR and Learning: The Impact of Three Dimensional Immersive 
 Virtual  Environments  on  Modern Pedagogy.  HITL  Report,  Washington  University,
 pp. 97–105 (1997) 

11.  Rizzo,  A.S.:  State  of  the  Art  in  Virtual  Rehabilitation.  CyberPsychology  and  Behavior 
9(2), 113 (2006) 

12.  Amemiya, T., Yamashita, J., Hirota, K., Hirose, M.: Virtual leading blocks for the deaf-
blind: a real-time way-finder by verbal-nonverbal hybrid interface and high-density RFID 
tag space. In: Proceedings of IEEE Virtual Reality, pp. 165–287 (2004) 

13.  Sánchez, J.: A model to design interactive learning environments for children with visual 

disabilities. Journal Education and Information Technologies 12(3), 149–163 (2007) 

14.  Roussou,  M.:  Virtual  reality  and  Interactive  Theaters:  Learning  by  Doing  and  Learning 
through Play: an Exploration of interactivity in Virtual Environments for Children. Computers 
 in  Entertainment  (CIE),  Section:  Virtual  reality  and  interactive  theaters 2(1),  10 
(2004) 

