A Model to Develop Videogames  

for Orientation and Mobility 

Jaime Sánchez1,2, Luis Guerrero1,2, Mauricio Sáenz1,2, and Héctor Flores1 

1 Department of Computer Science, 2 Center for Advanced Research in Education (CARE)  

University of Chile  

Blanco Encalada 2120, Zip Code 2777, Santiago, Chile 

{jsanchez,luguerre,msaenz,hflores}@dcc.uchile.cl 

Abstract. There is a real need to have systems for people with visual disabilities 
to be able to improve their orientation and mobility skills, and especially for 
children to be able to improve their autonomy into the future. However, these 
systems must be designed according to available objectives, methodologies and 
resources, as well as by taking the interests and ways of interacting of the end 
users into account. This work presents a model for the development of video-
game-based  applications,  which  includes  differing  levels  of  abstraction  and  
different  stages  in  the  design  and  development  of  systems  that  allow  for  the  
improvement of orientation and mobility skills for people with visual disability. 
The feasibility of the model was studied by modeling two videogames for children 
with visual disabilities.  

Keywords:  Software  engineering  model,  serious  videogames,  orientation  and 
mobility, audiogames. 

1   Introduction 

Spatial relations during the first years of life are established through the ability to situate 
oneself in space, using different sensory channels and strategies that allow one to 
assimilate and integrate the information intake from the environment. This information 
is transformed into meaningful knowledge that we use throughout our lives [2]. 

In the case of a blind child, in the sensory-motor period of his/her development, 
aspects  such  as  the  permanence  of  an  object  is  a difficult  concept  to  acquire,  given 
that vision is the main sense that provides information on the presence of objects or 
people in a certain location [2]. For a child with visual disability to be able to develop 
this ability, it is necessary to be accompanied verbally during all the movements that 
he/she makes.  

Unlike a sighted child, for whom movement emerges as a result of visual curiosity,
 a blind child lacks visual experience, such as seeing oneself in the mirror, seeing 
other people and relating with them, or feeling a visual attraction towards an object 
[10]. As a child  with  visual  disability does  not have the chance  to be “attracted” to 
things, his/her mobility will be diminished, as initially sound is not able to transmit 
the  existence  of  things  that  can  be  touched;  although  in  time  and  with  the  positive 

K. Miesenberger et al. (Eds.): ICCHP 2010, Part II, LNCS 6180, pp. 296–303, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 

 

A Model to Develop Videogames for Orientation and Mobility 

297 

development  of  auditory  perception,  this  can  change  [10].  As  a  consequence,  the 
experiences of a child with visual disability as compared to a sighted child regarding 
the initial stages of life, do not allow the  visually disabled child to integrate tactile, 
auditory and kinesthetic experiences in the same way as a sighted child [7].  

As far as orientation, children with visual disability should learn and understand 
from an early age that to be oriented is to know where one is, and to know the relationship 
 between  one’s  position  and  other  locations  in  space.  They  must  learn  to  
establish and utilize reference points that allow them to know where they are located 
at any given time in their navigation [17]. 

There  are  several  ways  to  help  users  with  visual  disabilities  to  achieve  autonomous 
navigation with the support of technology. Such technologies can be defined as 
any  item,  equipment  or  system  that  is  commercially  acquired,  and  is  modified  or 
adapted in such a way that it can be used to increase, maintain or improve the functional 
abilities of blind users [13]. Some projects provide different means of interaction 
 for blind  users through the  use of  mobile devices, implementing  ways of entry 
through the use of tactile or voice commands, the output of which is provided through 
verbal and/or iconic sounds [5][15]. 

Bradley and Dunlop [3] consider the contextual differences in which the blind user 
moves  about,  differentiating  between  indoor  and  outdoor  systems.  The  main  result 
includes  the  fact  that  with  location  systems  for  legally  blind  people,  both  technical 
aspects  of  the  technology  and  the  different  ways  in  which  the  users  codify  spatial 
information according to the context in which they are immersed must be taken into 
account. Other mobile aid solutions for the orientation and mobility of legally blind 
users take advantage of the logic of the environments with which these users relate. 
Sánchez and Maureira [15] present mBN, a system of navigation to be used in a subway 
station. Without the need of any other device besides a handheld PocketPC, the 
user  can  obtain  information  from  the  various  subway  stations  and  certain  aids  that 
allow him/her to enjoy autonomous navigation. Another way to help them to be more 
autonomous is to train them virtually, to then apply the knowledge attained in the real 
world [1]. In the studies carried out by  Lahav and Mioduser [6] the user’s achievement 
regarding their cognitive representation of the virtually navigated space that they 
attain, and their ability to apply this representation in carrying out tasks in a real space 
are examined. The results show the success of the experience, in which the users are 
able to construct a mental map and then apply it to the real world. 

In general, videogames are seen only as tools for entertainment. They can also be 
used  as  powerful  learning  tools  [12].  However,  although  the  majority  of  successful 
studies  and  projects  in  this  area  refer  to  sighted  children,  there  is  a  clear  niche  for 
research  on  the  application  of  videogames  in  support  teaching  new  skills  to  blind 
children.  

In  this  way,  for  the  purpose  of  this  study  it  is  necessary  to  evolve  from  a  traditional 
software development process, and adapt it to these new needs (blind children, 
serious videogames, orientation and mobility learning), thus creating a new development 
model. Therefore, the objective of our study is to propose a model for the development 
 of  videogame-based  applications  designed  to  assist  the  navigation  of  blind 
people, based on the adaptation, widening and integration of existing software engineering 
models and the design and evaluation of mobile applications that support the  
 

298 

J. Sánchez et al. 

orientation  and  mobility  of  blind  people  [16][11]  to  this  new  field  within  software 
engineering, related to the design and creation of videogames  for the education and 
learning of blind children. 

2   Methodology 

To  design  this  innovative  and  specific  model  for  the  development  of  video  gamebased 
applications for the navigation of blind people, other models that have already 
been designed, developed and validated by the authors of this  study  were used as a 
reference.  These  models,  however,  do  not  consider  the  video  game  factor  and  the 
multi-disciplinary nature of the focus for the current study. The first model taken for 
reuse is related to the design, development and evaluation of mobile applications to 
support  the  development  of  orientation  and  mobility  (O&M)  skills  in  blind  people 
[16]. The second model is related to software engineering, and is used to support in 
the development of conventional mobile applications for learning. This model allows 
the developers to consider aspects that are critical to the development of a functional 
application [11]. 

3   Model 

In  order  to  develop  video  game-based  applications  for  the  improvement  of  O&M 
skills in blind users, it is necessary to consider three processes (see Fig.1): (1) Definition 
of Cognitive  Skills Navigation, (2) Software Engineering, and (3) Impact Testing.
 These processes must be executed cyclically and iteratively. This creates a global 
process that incrementally adjusts the technological tool that is being developed to the 
cognitive objective regarding the navigation of blind users. 
 
Definition of Cognitive Skills Navigation: During this stage all of the O&M skills 
that  are  required  to  support  the  following  are  determined:  perceptual  development, 
spatial  orientation,  motricity,  communication,  basic  concepts  and  protection  techniques 
[17]. These skills are represented by behaviors and knowledge that the users 
must exhibit in order to carry out autonomous navigation. 

This stage is fundamental to be able to begin the process for the development of 
technological tools. Here the most significant problems are identified, which are to be 
dealt with in the following software engineering process. The main objective of this 
stage is to determine the feasibility of the solution, as well as its restrictions (technical 
and methodological). The proposed solution will depend on the balance between the 
technological context and the orientation and mobility skills that are to be supported.  
 
Impact  Evaluation:  We  were  interested  in  knowing  the  gains  in  terms  of  learning 
(O&M skills) between the pretest and posttest scores, which are the result of having 
used the application. The dependent variable corresponds to the O&M skills studied. 
Basically, this design responds to three steps: (1) Application of a pretest that measures 
the behavior of the dependent variable prior to the intervention; (2) Application 
of  the  intervention,  which  imply  use  of  the  video  game  for  O&M  skills;  and  (3)  
Application of a posttest  that  measures the behavior of the dependent  variable after 
the intervention. 

 

A Model to Develop Videogames for Orientation and Mobility 

299 

 

Fig. 1. Global iterative process for software development to improve the O&M skills in blind 
people 

Software Engineering Process: In this stage of the model, efforts are mainly concentrated 
on the process of software engineering for the design and development of applications 
 that  can  be  used  to  improve  the  orientation  and  mobility  skills  of  blind 
people. To these ends, it is proposed to work using the 5 traditional phases of systems 
development: Initial Phase, Analysis Phase, Design Phase, Implementation Phase and 
Evaluation Phase (see Fig. 2). 

3.1   Initial Phase 

During this phase, the feasibility for the development of the application is determined. 
An analysis of the technological context in which the video games will be developed 
is performed, and the O&M skills to be developed in users with visual disabilities are 
defined  (see  Fig.  2).  Technological  Context:  Refers  to  the  technology  available  in 
the market that can provide support for possible technological solutions for the development 
of orientation and mobility skills. In particular, the problem to be dealt with 
must be clear (defined by Orientation and Mobility Skills), and based on this one can 
define the most pertinent technology to be used. O&M Skills: The objective of this 
stage is to clearly define which specific O&M skills we will be able to support with 
the system to be developed. 

3.2   Analysis Phase 

In this phase an analysis of the end-users of the video game to be developed is analyzed,
 as well as the internal and external restrictions to the project. This is a stage to 
consider the most significant variables that  will interfere in the design and development 
process. Real Situations Analysis: The real contexts in which the users would 
be able to carry out their activities, given the specific orientation and mobility skills 
that it is desired to support, must be analyzed. This analysis  must include the problems 
that are presented within the environment, which could impede the navigational 
tasks from being completed, and considering a complete profile of the user that will 
utilize the system. End-User: The users’ characteristics on a cognitive level (O&M), 
mental  model,  degree  of  vision  and  their  most  significant  descriptive  variables  are 
specified. Restrictions: All of the restrictions that must be considered for the user to  
 

300 

J. Sánchez et al. 

 

Fig. 2. Model to develop videogame applications to develop O&M skills in blind users 

be  able  to  correctly  develop  the  desired  O&M  skills  are  defined.  Both  the  rules  of 
conduct for the user while using the technology and the social behaviors involved in 
the  activity  are  specified.  Videogame:  This  component,  developed  between  the 
analysis  stage  and  the  design  stage,  allows  us  to  define  how  to  design  the  support 
system for O&M as a videogame. 

3.3   Design Phase 

HCI Definition: In this component the specific guidelines for how the interfaces and 
the  interaction  with  the  system  to  be  developed  must  be  designed.  To  do  this,  it  is 
necessary to take the characteristics of the end users, their habitual ways of interacting 
and their interests into account. This also includes the specific characteristics of the 
system  so  that  it  has  a  recreational,  “educational  videogame”  type  orientation  [12], 
and so that it is used to develop O&M skills. The end users’ considerations are provided 
during Analysis of the Real Situation stage, in which the users and their needs 
are  defined  (see  Fig.  2).  Due  to  this  information,  which  can  be  considered  within 
different technological contexts, it is necessary to include the  way in  which a blind 
user  interacts  with  different  kinds  of  technology  [9].  Environment:  Component  responsible 
for defining where the system to be developed will be used. This is based 
on an abstract representation of the real world in the system. The computational representation 
 of  the  real  environment  must  be  in  accordance  with  the  tasks  that  the 
videogame users have to perform. Tasks: For the correct development of the skills to 
be analyzed, it is necessary for the tasks, defined both on the level of the real environment 
 (if  the  system  is  mobile,  for  example)  and  on  the  level  of  the  software,  
to allow  for the child to use  the orientation and navigation tools through the  videogame 
itself. This is essential for the kind of skills that it is sought to develop. These 
tasks must include elements from the real environment to be represented in the virtual 
world. General guidelines for how this environment should be represented will also be 
provided.   

 

A Model to Develop Videogames for Orientation and Mobility 

301 

3.4   Implementation Phase 

After the design phase the problem to be solved is clear, as well as the best way to 
achieve this. The task assigned to this phase consists of developing the solution that 
has been designed in the previous phase. Interfaces: In this stage of the model, the 
different interfaces that the blind user will use to develop the previously defined tasks 
are implemented. These interfaces can be of different sorts: Audio [14], haptic [8] and 
multimodal  [4].  These  interfaces  must  include  the  users’  characteristics  (from  the 
Definition of HCI component), and the elements that make the orientation and mobility 
 tasks  possible.  Functionalities:  During  this  process,  the  data  structures  and  the 
specific  functionalities for the system being developed are defined. This component 
includes the activities within the tasks to be performed and implements the necessary 
functionalities, always making sure that it is possible to complete all the specific tasks 
assigned.   

3.5   Evaluation Phase 

By the end of the previous phase, the videogame has already been implemented. During 
this testing phase, the video game is tested in order to solve possible errors and 
defects (corrective maintenance), and to modify or improve the videogame (adaptive 
maintenance).  During  this  stage,  the  following  tasks  must  be  considered.  Usability 
Testing:  In  order  to  evaluate  the  interfaces  used  by  the  system  developed,  specific 
usability evaluations must be applied [9] (quantitative and/or qualitative), in order to 
assure that the users’ interactions with the system are adequate and pertinent. These 
evaluations  must be performed  with end users, and involve the previously designed 
interfaces.  Real  Context:  During  the  design  of  the  interfaces  for  the  system  to  be 
developed,  it  is  necessary  to  consider  evaluations  based  on  the  real  environment. 
These  evaluations  can  be  either  quantitative  and/or  qualitative.  The  main  idea  is  
that from these evaluations, relevant considerations regarding how the user interacts 
in the real environment emerge in such a way that the system adjusts to this kind of 
interaction.  Laboratory  Context:  In  order  to  make  a  more  controlled  and  precise 
evaluation, it is necessary to perform experiments in a laboratory in order to evaluate 
usability. These evaluations would be of a more focused nature, and would define the 
specific  redesigns  for  the  interfaces  being  developed.  Functionalities  Evaluation: 
This stage of the development will validate if the functionalities of the system developed 
 do  what  they  have  to  do.  Exhaustive  tests  must  be  taken  within  a  laboratory 
setting regarding the system’s behavior under various simulated conditions of use.  

4   Conclusions 

In  this  work,  a  model  for  the  design,  development  and  evaluation  of  video  gamebased 
applications is presented and described, so that users with visual disabilities can 
improve  their  O&M  skills.  A  theoretical  review  of  the  concepts  related  to  mobility 
and  digital  technology,  the  use  of  technology  for  O&M  sills,  and  the  use  of  video 
games  to  support  learning  was  performed.  Afterwards,  the  proposed  model  was  
presented, as well as its different stages and the impact that it has had on the development 
process. 

302 

J. Sánchez et al. 

Our  previous  experience  with  the  design  of  educational  software  development 
models for the blind [39] has taught us how important it is to provide design and development 
 tools  for  such  systems.  These  tools  can  considerably  improve  the  pertinence,
 acceptance and use of these systems by the end users. 

The early development of orientation and mobility skills in blind children is fundamental 
for their performance in navigating unknown environments autonomously. 
At the same time, a higher understanding of space and the development of orientation 
and  mobility  skills  does  not  only  allow  them  to  develop  psychomotor  activities  at 
their age level, but also allows them to have a higher level of learning with regards to 
their  perception  and  understanding  of  the  environment.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  the 
model  presented  in  this  work  can  be  an  essential  contribution  to  generating  videogames 
in support of the development of orientation and mobility skills, thus creating 
innovative ways of improving such abilities.  

As it has been presented in the model, the end user takes on a leading role in the 
design of the systems, thus constituting an end user-based design. The participation of 
the end user in the main stages of development favors acceptance of the final product, 
an  adequate  and  pertinent  use  in  accordance  with  the  user’s  mental  model,  and  reduces 
the costs associated with redesigns due to problems with the interaction. 

In future work, this model will be used as a basis for the design of mobile systems 
so that blind users can improve their navigational methods, making them more efficient 
 and  thus  helping  them  to  improve  their  autonomy  in  different,  everyday-life 
environments.  All  in  all,  the  systems  based  on  this  model  will  help  to  improve  
the navigation of blind users, and with this will aid in their integration and inclusion 
in society.  

References 

1.  Amandine, A., Katz, B., Blum, A., Jacquemin, C., Denis, M.: A Study of Spatial Cognition 
in an Immersive Virtual Audio Environment: Comparing Blind and Blindfolded Individuals.
 In: Proc. of 11th ICAD, pp. 228–235 (2005) 

2.  Arnáiz,  P.:  Deficiencias  visuales  y  psicomotricidad:  teoría  y  práctica.  Madrid:  ONCE.  

Departamento de Servicios Sociales para Afiliados (1994) 

3.  Bradley, N., Dunlop, M.: Investigating design issues of context aware  mobile guides for 
people  with  visual  impairments.  In: Proceedings  of  workshop  on HCI  in  Mobile  Guides 
Workshop at International Symposium, Mobile HCI 2004, Glasgow, UK, September 13, 
2004, pp. 1–6 (2004) 

4.  Crossan, A., Brewster, S.: Multimodal Trajectory Playback for Teaching Shape Information 
 and  Trajectories  to  Visually  Impaired  Computer  Users.  ACM  Trans.  Access.  Comput 
1(2), 1–34 (2008) 

5.  Dowling, J., Maeder, A., Boldes, W.: A PDA based artificial human vision simulator. In: 
Proceedings of the WDIC 2005, APRS Workshop on Digital Image Computing, pp. 109–
114, Griffith University (2005) 

6.  Lahav,  O.,  Mioduser,  D.:  Construction  of  cognitive  maps  of  unknown  spaces  using  a 
multi-sensory virtual environment for people who are blind. Computers in Human Behavior 
24(3), 1139–1155 (2008) 

7.  López, M.: Aspectos evolutivos y educativos de la deficiencia visual, 1a Edición. Netbiblo, 

Sl, ACoruña (2004) 

 

A Model to Develop Videogames for Orientation and Mobility 

303 

8.  McGookin, D., Brewster, S., Jiang, W.: Investigating touchscreen accessibility for people 
with  visual  impairments.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  5th  Nordic  Conference  on  HumanComputer 
interaction: Building Bridges, NordiCHI 2008, Lund, Sweden, October 20-22, 
vol. 358, pp. 298–307. ACM, New York (2008) 

9.  Nielsen, J.: Usability engineering. Academic Press Professional, New York (1993) 
10.  Nielsen, L.: Oportunidades para el niño. Relaciones espaciales en niños ciegos congénitos. 
In:  International  Council  for  Education  of  the  Visually  Handicapped,  vol. 66,  pp.  3–15. 
Christoffel Blinden Mission (1989) 

11.  Ochoa, S., Alarcón, R., Guerrero, L.A.: Understanding the Relationship between Requirements 
 and  Context  Elements  in  Mobile  Collaboration.  In:  Jacko,  J.A.  (ed.)  HCII  2009. 
LNCS, vol. 5612, pp. 67–76. Springer, Heidelberg (2009) 

12.  Prensky, M.: Computer games and learning: Digital game-based learning. In: Raessens, J., 
Goldstein Raessens, J. (eds.) Handbook of Computer Game Studies, pp. 97–122. The MIT 
Press, Cambridge (2005) 

13.  Rodrigues, C.: Um Dispositivo Háptico de Auxílio À Navegacao para Deficientes Visuais. 
Trabalho de Graduacao ao Centro de Infromática da Universidade Federal de Pernambuco 
para a obtencao do grau de Bacharel em Ciência da Computacao (2006) 

14.  Sánchez,  J.:  User-Centered  Technologies  for  Blind  Children.  Human  Technology  Journal 
45(2), 96–122 (2008) 

15.  Sánchez, J., Maureira, E.: Subway Mobility Assistance Tools for Blind Users. In: Stephanidis,
  C.,  Pieper,  M.  (eds.)  ERCIM  Ws  UI4ALL  2006.  LNCS,  vol. 4397,  pp.  386–404. 
Springer, Heidelberg (2007) 

16.  Sánchez, J., Sáenz, M., Baloian, N.: Mobile Application Model for the Blind. In: Stephanidis,
 C. (ed.) HCI 2007. LNCS, vol. 4554, pp. 527–536. Springer, Heidelberg (2007) 

17.  Schultz, P.: Movilidad e independencia para el discapacitado visual. Dinámicas Psicológicas 
del proceso de Enseñanza. Córdoba (Argentina): ICEVH. vol. 69 (1990) 

