Usability and UX Evaluation of a Mobile Social Application

to Increase Students-Faculty Interactions

Ticianne Darin1(✉), Rossana Andrade2, José Macedo2, David Araújo2,

Lana Mesquita2, and Jaime Sánchez3

1 Virtual University Institute, Federal University of Ceará,

Humberto Monte, s/n, Fortaleza, Brazil

ticianne@virtual.ufc.br

2 Department of Computer Science, Federal University of Ceará,

Humberto Monte, s/n, Fortaleza, Brazil

{rossana,lanabeatriz}@great.ufc.br, jose.macedo@lia.ufc.br,

3 Department of Computer Science, University of Chile, Blanco Encalada 2120, Santiago, Chile

david.brasillo@gmail.com

jsanchez@dcc.uchile.cl

Abstract.  The  massive  adoption  of  smart  devices  in  the  last  years  have
increased the use of mobile social applications, which can take advantage of
features  like  real-time  location,  to  help  people  relate  with  their  physical
communities and surroundings. The success of such applications depend on
achieving a critical mass of users, who share their personal information and
opinions. Thus, evaluating the usability and the user experience, according to
the context of use and to the community behavior is essential to deliver an
application that meets the user needs and expectations. This paper introduces
a mobile social application, called Eai?, developed to improve the interaction
between students and faculty in a Brazilian University, regarding the Univer‐
sity Restaurant and news related to the campus. The main goal of this appli‐
cation is to empower the students, allowing them to expose their opinion on
the taste and quality of each meal, the staff service, and other relevant topics.
Moreover, we report an evaluation of usability and user experience of this
application, considering the challenges of deploying a mobile social system,
along to whether Eai? improves students-faculty interactions or not.
Keywords: Mobile social application · Usability · User experience · Studentfaculty 
interaction

1

Introduction

Student-faculty formal and informal interactions are positively related to student persis‐
tence, satisfaction, and learning. Nevertheless, students who engage less with faculty
members and institutional agents are more likely to feel disconnected to the institution
and unsatisﬁed with the campus environment [1]. Students’ social connections with
peers and faculty may also enhance students’ sense of belonging to the institution, ulti‐
mately leading to greater classroom engagement in reasoning activities [2]. The students

© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
C. Stephanidis (Ed.): HCII 2016 Posters, Part II, CCIS 618, pp. 21–29, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-40542-1_4

22

T. Darin et al.

consider that a high-quality student-faculty interaction occurs when faculty care and
support them [3]. The Federal University  of Ceará, in Brazil, supports low-income
students with the University Restaurant (UR), a unit designed to provide balanced meals
to students and staﬀ. The UR has the capacity for 3,000 meals/day and serves breakfast,
lunch and dinner. The students constantly discuss the taste and quality of each meal, the
staﬀ service, and the usually crowded lines. However, they are unable to expose their
opinion for a massive group of students or give feedback to the institutional agents in a
simple manner. As a result, the students may be uninspired to interact with faculty
members and institutional agents, hence increasing the feeling of dissatisfaction with
the campus environment.

To help to overcome this situation, the mobile social application Eai? (Brazilian
Portuguese for “Hey, what´s up?”) was developed. In this application, students can
follow the weekly menu of the UR, qualify, and share opinions and reviews about the
daily meals. The students can use the Android application Eai? to qualify the state of
the UR lines and to know, in real time, what other users are saying about the lines, and
to know when is the best time to go to the UR. Also, Eai? provides a news feed about
the University, and other also miscellaneous news, where the students can also interact.
This work presents the evaluation of usability and user experience (UX) of Eai?, which
used a multi-method approach aiming to understand the system usage and to explore the
quality of user’s interaction and perceptions of the system. Our research hypotheses are:
(1) Eai? can positively impact the students’ behavior, increasing their social connections
with peers; (2) Eai? is useful to assess the quality of the UR service, increasing the
students-faculty interactions; (3) To provide tools like forum and news related to the
University positively impacts student’s sense of belonging to the institution. The results
show that overall the students ﬁnd Eai? useful, trustable, stimulating and easy to use,
although they pointed some necessary improvements. We also discuss how the answers
to hypotheses 2 and 3 vary according to the student’s experience with the UR, and their
use of the application.

2 Eai?, a Mobile Social Application
Eai? is a place-centric mobile social application, where college students can share a
common interest and constantly interact, beneﬁting each other with the knowledge and
experience related to their current location, the University Restaurant (UR). The appli‐
cation provides diverse facets of social interactions, such as social feedback mecha‐
nisms,  personal  identiﬁcation,  and  identity  expression  [5].  Features  such  as  rating,
reviewing, discussion forum and customizable proﬁles support the possibilities of social
interaction in Eai?. The application also allows students to share at any time, their opin‐
ions about each one’s personal experience in the University Restaurant. In this manner,
Eai? enables a real-time exchange of location-related experiences of locally dispersed
participants, so the students became part of a mobile community [4]. Currently, the
application has over 2600 downloads in the Google Play platform, counts 194 reviews
(183 are 5 or 4 stars), and its rating is 4.7 in the Store. The main functionalities of the

Usability and UX Evaluation of a Mobile Social Application

23

application are listing the weekly meal menu of the UR, sharing reviews about the meals,
showing the states of UR lines, and providing news feed and a discussion forum (Fig. 1).

Fig. 1.
(A) List of meals of the day, (B) Details of a selected meal, (C) Pop up for rating and
commenting about a meal, (D) Home Screen showing the state of the restaurant lines and the News
feed

The Fig. 1A illustrates the list of meals organized from Monday to Friday, according
to the meal time. Figure 1B shows the details of a selected meal, as side dishes, and juice
and desert options. Figure 1C demonstrates the reviewing process, where the user can
rate and comment about a meal. At the Home Screen (Fig. 1D) the user can see the realtime 
state of the UR lines according to the interaction of users located at the UR. For
this purpose, the application has a function where the users can classify the state of the
line. The home screen also shows a short version of the news feed, which intends to
increase the experience for a common user of the restaurant. The news is distributed into
two categories: general news and news about the University campuses. This news is
sorted by the user’s interest, calculated in an algorithm focused on variables of contin‐
uous use. The students can ‘like’ or ‘dislike’ the articles in General News, while in each
item  about  the  University  they  can  comment  and  interact  with  each  other.  These
commentaries may become a bigger discussion about the subject. In this case, it can be
discussed at the Forum named Boca no Trombone (Brazilian Portuguese for “Blow the
whistle”) where the students can expose their concerns and give feedback about the UR
and other University services.

3 Evaluation Process
The assessment process of Eai? considered two of the challenges of deploying a
mobile social application, utility and usability [6], while assessing the user experi‐
ence as well. The evaluation planning was based on the DECIDE framework. To
understand the system usage and to  explore the quality of user’s interaction and
perceptions of the system, we applied quantitative and qualitative methods. First,
we collected quantitative data in the form of a questionnaire, adapted by the authors

24

T. Darin et al.

from the Computer System Usability Questionnaire (CSUQ) [7], and from the Ques‐
tionnaire  for  User  Interface  Satisfaction  (QUIS)  [8].  It  was  administered  to  109
users, among students and university staff, in September 2015. Due to the context
of the evaluation (in the restaurant, when users were coming for the lunch or leaving
after it), its purpose was to obtain an overview of the user feedback on the applica‐
tion. The questionnaire consisted of 14 closed-ended questions, answered in 5-point
Likert scales, plus three open-ended questions. The questions acquired information
about the application’s impact on the behavior of the users, the utility of the appli‐
cation to evaluate the UR service, and the user’s expectations.

The second phase of the evaluation occurred from October to November in the same
year, to reﬁne the data and to expand the understanding of the user experience for new
users. We gathered qualitative data with semi-structured contextual interviews, obser‐
vation of usage and informal conversation with 34 participants, among users and poten‐
tial users, allowing a depth research. We performed the evaluations in group sessions
with students belonging to three categories: students who currently do not take meals at
the University Restaurant; students who regularly have lunch or dinner at the UR, but
are not Eai? users; and students who regularly have the same meals at the UR and
currently are Eai? users. During this evaluation, users completed a pretest questionnaire
about their experience with technology and with the University Restaurant. Then, each
user performed eight tasks in the application, selected from possible usage scenarios.
For each activity performed, we observed and took notes of the reactions and both correct
and incorrect user interactions. After this, in a structured contextual interview, users
gave their opinion about the clarity, the eﬃciency and the importance of the function‐
alities, in the context of use of the UR. Users were also asked about the mistakes,
diﬃculties,  and experience  (regarding  emotions and feelings)  while performing  the
tasks. After ﬁnishing the activities, the users ﬁlled out a post-test questionnaire, adapted
from the Final User Questionnaire for Usability Evaluation of websites [9] and QUIS.
Each session lasted 30 min on average. After the individual evaluations, the users were
divided into two focus groups, where they shared and discussed impressions, opinions,
and suggestions on the application.

4 Results and Discussion
In the ﬁrst evaluation, the average age of the 109 Eai? users (63 female) was 23.5 years
for women and 23.7 years for men. Among these, 73 % were students of the university
and 11 % were employees of the University or outsourced. Overall, the application was
considered useful (95 %), trustworthy (90 %), easy to use (92 %), stimulating (67 %) and
worthwhile (81 %). Regarding the organization of information and the sequence of
screens during the interactions in the application, most users gave positive feedback,
considering Eai? well-Organized (87 %), and with a clear sequence of screens (86 %).
The second phase of the  evaluation consisted in a  deeper investigation  with 34
students (9 female), remaining the same age of the ﬁrst evaluated group. We identiﬁed
that 80 % of the participants used to interact with their smartphones while having meals
at the UR. They mainly use applications of instant messaging (66.7 %), social networking

Usability and UX Evaluation of a Mobile Social Application

25

(47.6 %), music and games (28.6 %), and reading (19 %). It is important to point out that
the functionalities of social networking and reading are also present in Eai?. It combines
in a single application both the capabilities the students need for a better UR service and
the ones they would like to have as pastime activities while at the UR. For this group of
students, the overall evaluation presented slightly lower percentages, due to the number
of students using Eai? for the ﬁrst time (potential users). They considered the application
useful (84 %), trustworthy (69 %), easy to use (66 %), and worthwhile (56 %).

The user experience assessment revealed some problems in the navigation, organi‐
zation, and labeling which made the new users felt confuse and sometimes frustrated.
It happened mainly in the activities of qualifying the lines, accessing the breakfast menu
options, adding a meal as favorite and commenting on the news, and in the students’
forum. These results evidenced that Eai? was not as easy to learn and eﬃcient as it
should be, although even the new users acknowledged the utility of its functionalities.
The discussions on the focus groups showed that the students like the overall idea of the
application. They were excited about the new possibilities and pleased with the initiative
of the University to improve the UR service by creating a social application. They
expressed the desire to use an improved version of the application. Moreover, they
expect Eai? to become an essential application for any student of UFC. The students
suggested that Eai? should integrate other features relevant to the UR, such as buying
UR credits, as well as possibilities of direct interaction among people in the UR.

4.1 Research Hypothesis#1: Eai? Can Positively Impact the Students’ Behavior
To ﬁnd out if the current users were using application features according to the expected
behavior, we evaluated how often they use the following functions: (1) to send infor‐
mation about the status of the line; (2) to access news; (3) to choose a dish based on
application  reviews,  and  (4)  to  send  notes  and  reviews  about  the  meals.  The  data
collected from the questionnaires showed that Eai? can increase the students’ perception
of social connections with peers, through the rating and comments about the meals. As
Table 1 summarizes, the users would like to consume the information Eai? provides,
but so far they do not show the same eagerness to provide information and collabora‐
tively feed the application.

Table 1. Summary of the answers about the impact of Eai? on the habits and behavior of the
user

Send information
about the lines

Access the news Rates and

Choose a meal
based on
comments
13 %
19 %
31 %
29 %
9 %

Never
Almost never
Sometimes
Almost always
Always

40 %
23 %
18 %
13 %
6 %

18 %
19 %
27 %
21 %
15 %

comments about
meals
22 %
20 %
24 %
21 %
12 %

26

T. Darin et al.

According to the questionnaires, 69 % of the students choose their meals based on
the other users’ comments about the food quality on Eai?. Although for 31 % of them,
it is not a daily practice yet. In the second phase of the evaluation, 77 % of the participants
declared that most of the times they choose a meal just when they take a look at it, and
not previously. It has been the predominant behavior pattern on the UR because there
was no other trustful way to choose a good meal. The number of daily accesses to Eai?
shows that this behavior is beginning to change. We believe that illustrating the menu
with actual pictures of the meals available on the day, and allowing users to send their
own pictures of the UR food will help to increase the number of students who choose
their meals previously, based on the comments available on Eai?. These were sugges‐
tions the users gave to improve their sense of reliability on the application. However, to
support sending pictures in this context is a very sensitive matter and must be planned
carefully, to avoid problems of deceit, embarrassment, pranks, and violation of privacy.
The questionnaires’ data showed that 63 % of the Eai? users access the News feature
(Table 1). The second investigation explained that users access the News while waiting
on the lines, or when they are having meals by themselves. However, among the new
users, 26.5 % think that this feature is out of context in the application, and 52.9 % said
they would not use it often. Sending information about the lines, and rating/commenting
about the meals are crucial functionalities for the proper working of Eai?. While 57 %
of the users send information about their meals, 63 % declare that they do not send
information  about  the  lines  (Table  1).  The  observations  and  contextual  interviews
showed that 91,2 % of the users found such features useful. However, they do not have
the commitment to feed the application frequently. For the success of the application, it
is necessary that more users will feed it with both information about the lines and the
food, on a daily basis. A gamiﬁcation approach could be used to stimulate the behavior
of feeding the application every time a user goes to the UR. This strategy associated
with real prizes and UR credits.

4.2 Research Hypothesis #2: Eai? Is Useful to Assess the Quality of the UR

Service, Increasing the Student-Faculty Interactions

To analyze the perception of the students about the impact that Eai? brings to the studentfaculty 
interactions, we gathered their opinion about whether the application improved:
(1) the way they use the UR; (2) the collaboration among students; and (3) the commu‐
nication with the University. In general, the users feel that the application has beneﬁted
them in the context of interactions with the University. As shown in Table 2, all the
results are positive, and the users found Eai? useful to analyze the quality of the service
and the food of the UR. They considered that Eai? increases the student-faculty inter‐
actions by improving the way how they use the UR (76 %), their collaboration with one
another (68 %), and their communication with the University (53 %). To promote a better
communication with the University, the application can aggregate a feature for feedback
from the UR staﬀ about changes in the menu based on the students requests and opinions,
showing how the University listens and support them.

Usability and UX Evaluation of a Mobile Social Application

27

Table 2. Summary of the answers related to the expectations and perceptions of the users
Your communication
with the University

The way you use the
restaurant

Your collaboration
with other students

Nothing changed
Changed a little
No opinion
Improved
Improved a lot

0 %
6 %
19 %
47 %
29 %

3 %
11 %
18 %
45 %
23 %

6 %
6 %
36 %
39 %
14 %

4.3 Research Hypothesis #3: To Provide Tools like Forum and News Related to

the University Positively Impacts Student’s Sense of Belonging to the
Institution

Eai? provides a forum that intends to enhance students’ social connections with peers,
while the News feed is supposed to complement their connection with the faculty. A
valuable and healthy social connection between student peers and with faculty may
enhance students’ sense of belonging to the institution [2]. During the focus groups, we
discussed the quality of these tools from the students’ point of view, and their perception
of the beneﬁts of using both the forum and the News. The answer varies according to
the student’s experience with the UR, and their use of the application. Overall, the forum
and the News to enhance the students sense of belonging to the institution. However,
the students declared that after ﬁxing some interaction problems, the forum and the News
would be able to help to reduce the feeling that the faculty board is far from the students.
Also, they aﬃrmed that whenever their discussion topics would become a subject of
interest to the alumni and faculty staﬀ, they would feel empowered, and an active part
of the community. Some students suggested that the application should also provide an
easy way for the students to get in touch with the ombudsman’s oﬃce of the University.
The forum named Boca no Trombone is a virtual space where the students can expose
their concerns and give feedback about the UR and other University services. However,
during the evaluations, we realized that neither the users nor the new potential users
were able to ﬁnd this functionality in the application interface. It occurred because the
forum was misplaced as if it was a category of News. This error explained the few
comments existing until then in the forum. When introduced to the forum and explained
about its purpose, the students were unanimous stating that is a feature they would
certainly use, especially if they would receive any feedback from the faculty staﬀ.

There are two categories of news available in the application: general and universityrelated.
 The users can comment and like the news using the same proﬁle they use to
comment and rate the meals. Although 76 % of the students classiﬁed it as easy to use,
they suggested unifying the news, not to limit the number of characters of a comment,
to oﬀer options to edit and delete, and to provide clearer feedback that the comment was
submitted. There were discrepancies about the News functionality, according to the user
proﬁles. Among the current users, 63 % uses the News feature regularly. However,
52.9 % of the potential new users said they would not use this function often, despite
they are very interested in using the other features of Eai?. We believe that the News

28

T. Darin et al.

tend to become more important to the users as they incorporate the use of Eai? to their
daily routine.

5 Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we introduced Eai?, a mobile social application aiming to empower college
students and to increase the student-faculty interaction. It allows the students to expose
their opinion on the service provided by the University Restaurant, and to discuss other
relevant topics. We also reported and discussed an evaluation of usability and user
experience of this application. The results indicate that, although some improvements
are necessary, Eai? is useful to assess the quality of the UR service, and can positively
impact the students’ behavior, and sense of belonging to the institution. The application
can evolve according to the needs of users and to provide a pleasant and eﬃcient use.
A future work should include correcting the usability issues, improving the News and
Forum features, incorporating a gamiﬁcation strategy, and developing versions to other
mobile operating systems.

The sense of belonging to a greater community can improve people’s motivation,
health, and happiness. In the case of students, a sense of belonging to the institution
ultimately  can  lead  to  greater  classroom  engagement  in  reasoning  activities  [2].
However, to build a sense of belonging requires active eﬀort and practice. There must
exist  a  cooperation  between  the  students  and  the  University.  While  the  institution
provides and maintains an application carefully developed to enhance student’s daily
routine, the students have to commit to feeding the application frequently, instead of
just expect to consume the information. In this sense, the success of the application
depends on the interaction within the user community.

References

1. Stebletonand, M.J., Aleixo, M.B.: Examining undocumented latino/a student interactions with
faculty  and  institutional  agents.  J.  Hisp.  High.  Educ.  14,  256–273  (2015).  doi:10.1177/
1538192715574097

2. Kim, Y.K., Lundberg, C.A.: A structural model of the relationship between student–Faculty
interaction and cognitive skills development among college students. Res. High. Educ. 57,
288–309 (2015). New York, NY, USA

3. Smith,M.A.: Who Cares? Student-Faculty Interaction at a Research University, Maryland,

USA (2015). doi:10.13016/M2Q04P

4. Aschoﬀ, F.R., Novak, J.: The mobile forum: real-time information exchange in mobile sms
communities. In: Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2008),
Florence, Italy, pp. 3489–3494. ACM (2008)

5. Jung,Y., Blom, J., Persson, P.: Scent ﬁeld trial: understanding emerging social interaction. In:
Proceedings of the 8th Conference on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and
Services (MobileHCI 2006), pp. 69–76. ACM, New York (2006)

6. Heyer, C., Brereton, M., Viller, S.: Cross-channel mobile social software: an empirical study.
In:  Proceedings  of  the  SIGCHI  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems,
Florence, Italy, pp. 1525–1534. ACM (2008). doi:10.1145/1357054.1357294

Usability and UX Evaluation of a Mobile Social Application

29

7. Lewis, J.R.: Psychometric evaluation of the computer system usability questionnaire: The
CSUQ (Technical report 54.723). International Business Machines Corporation, Boca Raton,
FL (1992a)

8. Chin,  J.P.,  Diehl,  V.A.,  Norman,  K.L.:  Development  of  an  instrument  measuring  user
satisfaction of the human-computer interface. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 213–218. ACM, Washington (1988). EUA

9. Sánchez,  J.:  Final  User  Questionnaire  for  Usability  Evaluation  of  Websites.  Usability

evaluation test. University of Chile (2004)

