Human Centric E-Learning and the Challenge of  

Cultural Localization 

Albert Badre1, Stefano Levialdi2, Jim Foley1, John Thomas3, Carol Strohecker4, 

Antonella De Angeli6, Preetha Ram5, Ashwin Ram1, and Jaime Sanchez7 

1 Georgia Institute of Technology 

2 Dipartimento di Informatica, Universita' di Roma "La Sapienza" 

3 IBM T.J. Watson Research 
4 University of North Carolina 

5 Emory University 

6 University of Manchester, 
7 Universidad de Chile 
badre@cc.gatech.edu 

1   Introduction 

The cutting edge of designing for the user experience today is found in the arena of designing 
 for  the  user’s  cultural context  {1},  {2},  {3}. This  is  primarily  true  because of 
global  expansion  of  the  Internet  and  Web  usage.  Brick  and  mortar  businesses  have 
learned to adapt their products to be culturally sensitive. For example, car manufacturers 
build the same basic platform with different styling and amenities depending on where 
the vehicle will be sold. To convey an appealing image to potential buyers and readers, 
publishers translating popular works into many languages usually have different covers 
designed for different countries: for this reason they aim towards the perception of an object 
and of its functions. We often differ in the way we experience the world around us. 
Our experiences differ relative to our primary language, educational practices, work habits,
 and what  makes for an enjoyable experience, whether in what and how  we like to 
play, what sounds that we appreciate, or colors that appeal to us {4}, {5}.  

2   E-Learning and the Culture Sensitive Human Centric Challenge 

The increasing interest in on-line learning leads us to seek answers to questions about 
how  to  provide  virtual  learning  environments  that  enhance  the  learning  experience, 
and at the same time address the needs of the culturally sensitive global learning context 
 of  the  World  Wide  Web.  More  specifically,  we  look  for  solutions  to  questions 
about making the virtual learning context user compatible, learner effective, and totally 
accessible (universally usable). 

Human-centric  e-learning  design  means  designing  for  the  user  experience  in  a  
specific  learning  context.  Designing  for  context  means  constructing  suitable  learning 
environments grounded in the learner’s learning ecology, be it a classic instructor-led 
classroom  environment,  learner-led  customized  setting,  collaborative  learning,  or 
knowledge-based tutorials. We know that providing the right context plays a crucial role 
in learning {6}. Students  who learn and then recall  material in the same environment 

C. Baranauskas et al. (Eds.): INTERACT 2007, LNCS 4663, Part II, pp. 690 – 691, 2007. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007 

 

Human Centric E-Learning and the Challenge of Cultural Localization 

691 

with specific contextual cues will perform better than those made to recall in a different 
environment.  Embedded in any context are cultural cues and clues that guide the process 
 of  observation  and  interpretation.  The  challenge  for  the  interactive  e-learning  designer 
is to provide e-learning content and tools that invoke the unique cultural cues of 
multiple localized, and potentially conflicting contexts, while at the same time allowing 
for  a  common  virtual  learning  environment,  where  virtual  learners  are  having  shared 
content and experience.  

The fundamental challenge for the panel is for each panelist to put forward their vision 
for the future of human-centric virtual learning environments and virtual learning 
communities.    The  panel  will  explore  the  issue  of  what  “human-centric”  in  the  
e-learning environment means, and how to resolve the issue of the seeming conflict 
between shared learning experience and the need to be culturally sensitive. 

More specifically, the panel will be asked to consider the following questions:  
1) What makes a virtual learning environment human-centric, and what are the requirements 
to make such an environment compelling and in high demand by potential 
participants? 

2)  Should  the  emphasis  of  learner-centered  or  user-centered,  be  more  on  the 
"learner"  or  the  "user"?  Is  there  a  conflict  to  be  resolved  between  “learner  culture” 
and “user culture”? 

3) How do we take cultural usability into account? While e-learning is by practice 
global, it has to be culturally sensitive to learner's unique  environment. How do  we 
reconcile the need for cultural localization with the requirement for universally consistent 
e-learning content? 

4) Describe your vision of an e-learning environment (existing or imaginary) that 

meets what you consider to be human-centric requirements and culturally sensitive? 

5)  What  are  the  implications  of  the  growing  virtual  social  networks,  for  humancentric 
and culturally sensitive e-learning? 

References 

1.  Badre, A.N.: Shaping Web Usability: Interaction Design in Context, pp. 213–227. Addison 

Wesley, Boston (2002) 

2.  Marcus,  A.,  Gould,  E.W.:  Cultural  Dimensions  and  Global  Web  User-Interface  Design: 
What? So What? Now What? In: 6th Conference on Human Factors and the Web in Austin, 
Texas (June 19, 2000) 

3.  De  Angeli,  A.,  Athavankar,  U.A.,  Joshi,  A.,  Coventry,  L.,  Johnson,  G.I.:  Introducing 
ATM’s  in  India:  A  contextual  enquiry.  Interacting  with  Computers  special  issue.  Global 
human-computer systems 16(1), 29–44 (2004) 

4.  Marcus, A.: International and Intercultural User-Interface Design. In: Stephanidis, C. (ed.) 

User Interfaces for All, Lawrence Erlbaum, New York (2000) 

5.  Hofstede, G.: Cultures and Organizations: Software of the Mind. McGraw-Hill, New York 

(1997) 

6.  Godden, D., Baddeley, A.: Context-dependent memory in two natural environments. British 

Journal of Psychology 81, 465–46 (1975) 

