Wireless  communication  system 
for  a  wide  area  sensor  network 

Magali  Cortez  and  Jaime  Sanchez 

Department  of Electronics  and  Telecommunications,  Applied  Physics  Division 

Center  of  Scientific  Research  and  Superior  Education  of  Ensenada 

Km.  107 Tijuana-Ensenada  Hwy. Baja  California,  Mexico 

{mcortez,jasan}Qcicese.mx 

http://www.cicese.mx 

Abstract.  In  this  paper,  the  design  and  implementation  of  a  wireless 
communication  system  specific  to  wide  area  sensor  network  capable  of 
establishing  ad  hoc  connections  is  presented.  First,  the  application  to 
which  this system  is applied  is explained,  and  then  a brief  description of 
the  system  is  made.  In  this  system  two  routing  algorithms  were  imple(cid:173)
mented,  one based  on  a static  links routing table  and  the  other  is the M 
to  1 algorithm  proposed  by  Lou  W.  in  [1]. Tests  were  carried  out  with 
the  designed  system  and  the  routing  algorithms  mentioned,  accomplish(cid:173)
ing satisfactory  communication  between  nodes  in  a  test  scenario  for  the 
first  case. 

Key  words:  Sensor  network,  wireless  networks,  wide  area,  microcon(cid:173)
trollers,  CR10X  acquisition  card 

1 

Introduction 

Nowadays,  wireless  sensor  networks  represent  one  of  the  most  innovative  tech(cid:173)
nologies.  In  general,  this  type  of  networks  consists  of  a  certain  number  of  nodes 
distributed  within  an  area.  The  nodes  are provided  with  some type  of sensor,  and 
thus  are  used  to  collect  and  process  data  [2]. No matter  what  the  application  be, 
the  sensor  nodes  that  integrate  this  network  have  similar  characteristics:  small 
size,  a  transmitter-receiver  module,  a  microprocessor  and  at  least  one  sensor; 
limited  in  energy  comsumption,  transmitting  power,  memory  and  processing  ca(cid:173)
pacity  [3].  These  nodes  communicate  by  forming  an  ad  hoc  network,  in  which 
data  is being  sent  from  a  source node  to  a  destination  node  through  intermediate 
nodes.  This  way,  the  covered  range  of  the  network  is  extended.  There  are  com(cid:173)
mercial  wireless  communications  systems  developed  under  the  IEEE  802.15.4 
standard  for  wireless  sensor  networks  that  offer  personal  area  coverage,  which 
are  suited  in  applications  where  the  nodes  are  distributed  in  a  small  area  or 
where  the  density  of  sensors  per  unit  area  is  large.  The  problem  arises  when 
a  larger  area  is  trying  to  get  covered,  at  an  urban  or  greater  level,  where  the 
nodes  are  separated  by  long  distances,  and  to  form  an  ad  hoc  topology  each 
node  requires  to  transmit  with  enough  power  to  reach  to  its  neighbors,  which 

Please use the following format when citing this chapter: 

Cortez, M., Sanchez, J., 2007, in IFIP International Federation for Information Processing, Volume 248, Wireless Sensor 
and Actor Networks, eds. L. Orozco-Barbosa, Olivares, T., Casado, R., Bermudez, A., (Boston: Springer), pp. 59-70. 

60 

Magali  Cortez,  Jaime  Sanchez 

is  not  possible  with  commercial  wireless  sensor  network  systems  due  to  the  fact 
that  these  transmit  with  very  little  power  (some  dBm).  The  Network  of  Defor(cid:173)
mations  of  the  Mexicali  Valley  (RDEFVM)  of  the  Deparment  of  Sismology  at 
CICESE  [4], presents  a  scenario where  the  sensor  nodes  are  being  separated  by  a 
few  kilometers.  The  collection  of  data  generated  by  each  node  is  done  manually 
by  monthly  visits  which  cause  a  delay  in  the  analysis  of  the  acquired  data,  and 
implies  an  economic  and  physical  burden,  specially  on  summer  months  when  the 
Valley's  high  attainable  temperature  may  reach  from  40  to  50  C.  A  remote  rec(cid:173)
ollection  of  the  data  with  a  wireless  network  would  avoid  those  problems,  with 
a  given  benefit  to  the  researchers  in  charge  of  the  RDEFVM. 

This  report  presents  the  design  and  implementation  of  a  wireless  commu(cid:173)

nication  system  specific  to  a  wide  area  sensor  network  capable  of  establishing 
ad  hoc  comunications.  A  graphical  user  interface  necessary  to  the  control  and 
recollection  of  data,  and  a  web  page  for  the  remote  recollection  of  data  via  inter(cid:173)
net  are  developed.  The  rest  of  the  document  is  organized  as  follows.  In  Section 
II,  a  description  of  the  system  designed  in  this  project  is  given  and  the  routing 
algorithms  implemented  are  explained.  In  Section  III,  the  test  scenario  is  ex(cid:173)
plained  and  the  results  obtained  are  presented  later.  Finally,  in  Section  IV,  the 
conclusions  of  this  work  are  presented. 

2  Structure  of  the  system 

This  section  describes  the  general  architecture  of  the  Wireless  Sensor  Network, 
the  design  methodology,  the  routing  algorithm  and  the  graphic  interface  devel(cid:173)
oped  for  the  user. 

2.1  Wireless  long  range  communication  system. 

In  a  wireless  sensor  network  applications  where  the  nodes  are  separated  by  long 
distances,  each  node  is  required  to  transmit  with  enough  power  to  reach  its 
neighboring  nodes  in  order  to  create  an  ad  hoc  network.  To  provide  wide  area 
coverage  to  the  RDEFVM,  each  node  was  equipped  with  a  high  power  trans(cid:173)
mitter  and  a  high  gain  antenna.  To  establish  ad  hoc  communication  within  the 
network,  each  node  had  a microcontroller  with  a routing  algorithm  loaded  previ(cid:173)
ously  in  its  memory.  Because  this  system  tries  to  give  a  solution  to  the  problem 
of data  collection  that  the  RDEFVM  represents,  the  characteristics  of the  nodes 
that  integrate  this  network  were  considered  in  the  design. 

The  RDEFVM  has  different  types  of sensors, but  to  begin,  only  displacement 
sensors  (inclinometers)  will  be  used.  Therefore,  each  node  in  the  network  will 
have  an  inclinometer,  a  CR10X  data  acquisition  card  from  Campbell  Scientific 
and  a  20W  solar  panel  capable  of  powering  the  node.  The  sensor  is  connected 
to  the  card,  which  has  the  task  of  acquiring,  processing  and  storing  the  data 
generated.  The data  acquisition  card's output  is through  a serial  communications 
port.  Otherwise,  to  have  access  to  the  network  from  a  remote  device  thorugh 
the  internet,  at  least  one  of the  nodes  must  be  connected  to  it.  A  graphical  user 

Wireless  communication  system  for  a WASN 

61 

interface  is  necessary  for  the  remote  control  of the  network  and  the  manual  and 
automatic  collection  of  the  data  captured  by  the  nodes. 

2.2  Network  Architecture. 

The  architecture  consists  of the  sensor  nodes,  an  access  node,  a  web  page  server 
and  a  remote  terminal.  The  sensor  nodes  form  the  basic  level  of  architecture  of 
the  system.  A  sensor  node  performs  the  network  functions  as  well  as  sensing, 
since  it  processes  and  sends  the  data  generated  by  itself  and  the  rest  of  the 
sensors  to  the  access  node. 

The  access node  is responsible  for  collecting  and  transmitting  the  information 
of  the  sensor  nodes  to  a  remote  terminal  via  internet.  The  access  node  is  a 
personal  computer  that  communicates  wirelessly  to  the  sensor  nodes  and  has 
specialized  software  for  the  recollection  of data.  The  web page  server  hosts  a  web 
page  necessary  for  the  remote  access to  the  network  via  itnernet.  For  simplicity, 
the  server  can  be  installed  in  the  acces  node.  Lastly,  the  remote  terminal  can  be 
any  computer  with  internet  access.  Figure  1  shows  the  architecture  described 
previously. 

Wireless terminal 

Wireless ad hoc sensor network 

O 

Sensor node 

h 

b 

- 

-

b 

D 

Web page server 

Access node v 

+ 

Fig. 1.  System  architecture 

2.3  Design  of  the  sensor  node. 

Originally, the  RDEFVM's  nodes were equipped  with  a sensor,  a data  acquisition 
card  and  a  battery  connected  to  a  solar  panel.  The  following  paragraphs  present 
the  design  of  the  electronic  circuit  that  needs  to  be  added  to  each  node  in  order 
to  establish  wireless  comunication.  From  this  on,  the  electronic  circuit  added 
will  be  called  the  wireless  interface. 

Figure  2 shows the  block  diagram  of the  sensor  node, name which  is  endowed 
to  the  original  node  of  the  RDEFVM  once  the  wireless  interface  is  added.  The 

62 

Magali  Cortez,  Jaime  Sanchez 

wireless  interface  can  be  divided  into  two  blocks:  one  represents  the  wireless 
communication  and  the  other  the  logical  control. 

Solar  panel 

m 

Sensor 

1 

Rechargeable 
[voltage source 

Acquisition 

L 

card 

J 

Wireless 

communication 
v 
J 

I 

Logical control 

Fig. 2.  Sensor  node  block  diagram 

Due  to  the  fact  that  the  nodes  are  separated  by  distances  measured  in  kilo(cid:173)

meters,  a  high  power  card  is  required  in  order  for  the  signal  emitted  by  a  node 
can  reach  some  other  neighboring  node  in  the  network.  The  wireless  card  by 
which  the  network  is  designed  is  the  AC4790  of  Aerocomm,  which  transmits 
with  1W  of  power  and  employs  FHSS  as  the  modulation  technique  [5]. 

On  the  other  hand,  to  give greater  coverage to  the  node,  a half wave  magnetic 
dipole  antenna  with  a  gain  of  2  dBi  and  a  900Mhz  operating  frequency  is  used. 
Since  the  AC4790  wireless  card  does  not  have  the  ability  to  establish  ad 
hoc  communications  in  the  network,  it  is  necessary  to  integrate  in  each  node 
a  microcontroller  to  handle  the  data  transfer  and  link  information.  A  program 
previously  loaded  in  the  microcontroller's  memory  handles  the  routing  as  well 
as  the  logical  control  of  the  entire  node.  Among  its  tasks  is  the  communication 
with  the  wireless  card  and  the  comunication  with  the  acquisition  card  for  the 
recollection  of  the  data  generated  by  the  sensors. 

The  microcontroller  used  is  Microchip's  PIC18LF542  [6],  which  has  serial 
communications  through  a TX  transmission  line and  an  RX  reception  line.  Since 
it  is  necessary  to  establish  communication  with  the  acquisition  card  as  well 
as  with  the  wireless  card,  a  switch  is  required  to  choose  between  those  two 
devices.  The  SN74CBTLV3257  from  Texas  Instruments  is  a  digital  switcher, 
better  known  as  a  MUX/DEMUX,  from  one  to  two  lines  of  four  bits,  and  is  the 
device  used  for  such  purpose.  Figure  3 shows  a  block  diagram  for  the  conection 
between  those  three  devices  and  figure  4 shows a picture  of the  wireless  interface 
prototype  designed. 

2.4  A d H o c  communication. 

The  packet flow in an AdHoc  network  is from  a source node to  a destination  node, 
using  intermediate  nodes  as  relays.  This  class  of  communication  may  be  done 
by  either  broadcast  or  routing  algorithms.  In  the  broadcast  mechanism,  packets 

Wireless  communication  system  for  a WASN 

63 

Acquisition 

card 

Wireless 

card 

MUX/ 

DEMUXl 

Rx 
Tx  Microcontroller 

<<< 

i 

Bit selector 

Fig. 3.  Chip  select  function  performed  by the  microcontroller. 

are  sent  from  a  source  node  and  are  retransmitted  by  the  neighbor  nodes  until 
they  eventually  reach  their  destination. 

Fig. 4.  The  wireless  interface  prototype 

There  are  two  options  for  the  broadcast  mechanism:  flooding  and  rumor 
broadcasting.  In flooding,  each node  checks the  arriving packets  and  if it  happens 
to  be the  destination,  it process the  packet;  otherwise it  retransmits  the  packet  to 
all  its neighbors,  as long  as the  maximum  number  of hopes  has not  been  reached. 
This  mechanism  does  not  need  to  know  the  network  topology,  hence  adding 
or  deleting  nodes  to  the  network  is  an  easy  process.  However,  this  mechanism 
has  several  problems,  among  them  is  the  implosion  problem,  which  means  that 
duplicate  packets  are  sent  to  the  same  node,  and  the  superposition  that  occurs 
when  two  nodes  send  the  same  packet  simultaneously. 

64 

Magali  Cortez,  Jaime  Sanchez 

Another  broadcasting mechanism  is called rumor, which is similar  to  flooding, 
with  the  difference  that  this  one  retransmits  the  packets  to  just  one  neighbor 
(which  is  chosen  in  a  random  way),  which  reduces  the  implosion  problem  [7]. 

The  routing  algorithms  base  their  operation  in  a  table  that  contains  routes 
to  reach  all  other  nodes.  A  route  is  a  sequence  of  hops  to  other  nodes,  needed 
to  reach  the  destination  node.  Each  node  has  its  own  routing  table,  depending 
of  it  location  inside  the  network.  The  network  topology  must  be  known  by  all 
nodes,  and  it  is necessary  a  route  maintenance  mechanism  to  update  the  routing 
tables  in  case  of  any  change.  An  example  of  a  routing  algorithm  with  a  route 
maintenance  mechanism  is the  AODV  [8], which was designed  for  Mobile  AdHoc 
Networks  where  the  network  topology  changes  frequently. 

In a network with  few nodes, the  broadcasting mechanisms  are more  adequate 

since  the  packets  may  reach  the  destination  node  with  relatively  few  retransmis(cid:173)
sions. Otherwise,  if a routing  algorithm  is employed, the  power  consumption  may 
be  optimized  since the  route  to  deliver  the  packets  is known  in  advance,  and  just 
the  necessary  retransmissions  are made; however,  it  needs memory  space to  store 
the  routing  tables.  Since the  RDEFVM  nodes  are  fixed,  and  the  geographical  lo(cid:173)
cation  of  each  node  is  known  in  advance,  it  was  decided  to  implement  a  routing 
algorithm  based  on  a  static  routes  table;  considering  that  the  microcontroller 
chosen  for  implenting  the  AdHoc  communication  has  enough  memory  to  store  a 
small  routes  table. 

2.5  Routing  algorithm. 

The  static  routes  table  used  for  the  network  counts  with  three  fields:  destination 
node,  next  node  and  number  of  routes  to  the  destination  node.  Once  the  des(cid:173)
tination  node  is  known,  the  next  node  is  looked  up  in  the  table  so  the  package 
can  reach  its  destination.  The  number  of  available  routes  is  checked  in  order  to 
get  to  the  destination  node,  if  there  is  more  than  one  possible  route,  and  the 
package  cannot  get  to  its  destiny  using  the  first  route,  then  the  remaining  routes 
will  be  used. 

Roughly,  the  microcontroller  constantly  checks  the  serial  port,  waiting  for 
a  packet  to  arrive.  If  the  address  of  the  node  receiving  the  packet  matches  the 
packet  destination  address,  the  remaining  of  the  header  is  processed,  and  the 
corresponding  actions  are  executed  on  the  acquisition  card.  In  this  case,  an  in(cid:173)
ternal packet  is constructed  and  sent to the acquisition  card,  asking for  an  answer 
to  a  command.  Once  the  acquisition  card  performs  the  asked  task,  the  micro(cid:173)
controller  receives  the  answer  and  constructs  a  packet  to  be  sent  to  the  Access 
Node.  The  constructed  packet  includes  the  next  node  address  for  transmitting 
the  packet  to  the  destination  node,  that  is  obtained  by  consulting  the  routing 
tables. 

The  constructed  packet  is  sent  by  the  node  through  the  wireless  communi(cid:173)

cations  card,  and  waits  for  an  Acknowledge  (ACK)  from  the  next  node.  Once 
the  ACK  is  received,  the  microcontroller  initializes  all  variables  and  registers 
used  and  waits  for  the  next  packet  (from  the  wireless  card)  to  be  processed. 

Wireless  communication  system  for  a WASN 

65 

In  case  of  receiving  a  negative  ACK,  the  constructed  packet  will  be  retransmit(cid:173)
ted  until  a  positive  ACK  be  received  or  until  the  number  of  retransmissions  is 
reached.  The  retransmission  opportunities  include  the  search  for  a  new  route,  if 
the  retransmission  number  has  been  reached  for  a  particular  route. 

Whenever  an alternate  route to the  destination  node exists, which means  that 
the  number  of  routes  field  in  the  routing  table  is  greater  than  one,  the  packet  is 
sent  again  until  acknowledged  or  until  the  retransmission  number  is  depleted.  If 
still  the  packet  is  not  received  correctly,  the  session  is  closed  and  the  registers 
and  variables  are  reinitialized,  and  the  process  remains  waiting  for  a  new  packet. 
When  the  packet  destination  address  does  not  match  that  of  the  node  receiving 
it,  the  packet  is retransmitted  to  the  next  node  en  route  to  the  final  destination. 
To  avoid  the  possibility  of  remaining  in  a  waiting  state  forever,  a  timer  is  ini(cid:173)
tialized  at  the  beginning  of  the  interaction  process  of  the  microcontroller  with 
the  acquisition  card.  In  case  the  timer  expires  (after  2  seconds),  and  no  answer 
be  received  from  the  acquisition  card,  the  card  is  considered  damaged  and  the 
message  error  in  the  acquisition  card  is  generated  and  sent  to  the  access  node. 
Once  the  error  message  is  sent,  the  microcontroller  choses  the  antenna  signal 
and  returns  to  the  waiting  loop,  checking  for  the  reception  of  a  packet  through 
the  serial  port,  returning  to  a  stable  situation. 

Packets  used  to  implement  the  routing  algorithm.  The  structure  of  the 
packets  used  for  implementing  the  routing  algorithm  is  shown  in  figure  5.  Each 
packet  contains  the  field  name  and  the  number  of  bytes  for  each  field.  Three  of 
the  packets  use  a  common  7  bytes  header,  which  is  needed  for  the  radio  chip 
(AC4790)  to configure  some parameters  for  the payload  transmission.  The  header 
contains  the  following  information:  packet  header  identifier  (81H),  payload  size 
(128  byte  maximum),  session  duration  (time  during  which  the  communication 
among  nodes  is  active),  number  of  retransmissions  (256  maximum),  and  MAC 
address  of  the  next  node. 

Command  type, code 0x01 (7 bytes header  + 
| * i 

Next hop 
MAC 

Message 
type 

j 

Payload 
Data Length 

Session 
count refresh 

Transmit 
Retries 

45 bytes) 
Destinatio 
nMAC 

Command 
Type 

Available 
bytes 

1 

1 

1 

1 

3 

1 

3 

1 

40 

Data type, code  0x02 (7 bytes  header + 128  bytes) 
181 

Session 
count refresh 

Payload 
Data  Length 

Next hop 
MAC 

Transmit 
Retries 

Message 
type 

DesttnaUo 
nMAC 

Date •  MPTR 

1 

1 

1 

1 

3 

1 

3 

124 

Error type, code 0x83 (7 bytes  header + 4  bytes) 
181 

Session 
count refresh 

Payload 
Data Length 

Next hop 
MAC 

Transmit 
Retries 

Message 
type 

Destinatio 
nMAC 

1 

1 

1 

1 

3 

1 

3 

ACK type, code 0x82 (4  bytes) 
I  82 
|i  h 

|  0x00: Failure, 0x01:  Success 

RSSI 

j  RSSi* 
l l 

I 
| 

j 

Fig. 5.  Packets  used  for  implementing  the  routing  algorithm  in  the  system. 

66 

Magali  Cortez,  Jaime  Sanchez 

Inside  the  payload  field  is added  another  header,  which  is used  by  the  micro(cid:173)

controller  to  identify  four  types  of  packets:  Instruction,  Data,  Error,  and  ACK. 
The  first  byte  value  of  this  header  identifies  the  type  of  packet  and  the  next 
three  bytes  specify  the  destination  address  of  the  packet.  Each  packet  may  in(cid:173)
clude  other  fields  on  its  header,  depending  on  the  packet  type. 

T h e  M-to-1  algorithm.  A  routing  table  is  easy  to  implement  and  is  suitable 
for  scenarios where  few  fixed  nodes  are  involved.  However,  if a  node  ceases to  be 
a  part  of  the  network  or  if  a  new  node  is added  (in  other  words,  the  topology  of 
the  network  changes),  an  updating  mechanism  for  the  routing  table  is  needed, 
otherwise  the  communication  of  the  network  would  be  hampered  because  the 
nodes  would  not  count  with  valid  routes;  for  this  reason,  an  M  to  1  algorithm 
proposed  in  [1] was  used. 

This  algorithm  takes  advantage  of  the  simple  flooding  by  adding  two  mech(cid:173)

anisms  which,  at  the  end  of  the  flooding  allow  the  nodes  to  know  alternative 
routes  to  get  to  the  base  node,  which  is  the  node  that  initiates  the  flooding. 

The  M-to-1  algorithm  bases  its  operation  in  the  fact  that  at  the  end  of 
a  simple  flooding,  a  tree  is  obtained,  which  is  headed  by  the  base  node  with 
branches  formed  by  the  closest  nodes  in  which  each  branch  is independent.  This 
algorithm  tries  to  unite  the  mentioned  branches  to  provide  more  return  routes 
for  the  base  node  to  get  to  each  node. 

The  message  structure  employed  is type,  mid,  nid,  bid,  est,  route,  where  type 
is the  type  of message,  in this  case  it's  RPRI;  mid  is the  number  of  the  sequence 
of  the  updating  route;  nid  is  the  message  sending  node's  identifier;  bid  is  the 
branch  identifier  of the  node  that  sent  the  message  that  is the  nid  of the  nearest 
node  to  the  base  node,  est  is  the  cost  of  the  route  that  could  be  the  number 
of  jumps;  route  is  the  path  by  which  the  package  has  traveled.  For  additional 
details  regarding  the  M  to  1 algorith,  consult  [1]. 

Integration  of  the  M-to-1  algorithm  to  the  designed  system.  The  M-to1 
 algorithm  allows  the  nodes  to  have  at  least  one  route  back  to  the  base  node, 
or  one-way  communications.  In  order  to  provide  the  system  two-way  communi(cid:173)
cations,  it  is  necessary  to  add  another  algorithm  that  allows  the  base  node  to 
know  the  route(s)  to  get  to  a  determined  node.  The  algorithm  added  for  that 
purpose  uses  the  following  messages:  RREQ  and  RREP. 

RREQ  is  a  routing  request  sent  by  the  base  node.  RREP  is  the  response  to 
that  petition  that  the  destination  node  sends  to  the  base  node  when  it  receives 
RREQ.  RREQ  is a  broadcast  message  while  the  RREP  is sent  following  a  route 
discovered  previously  by  using  the  M-to-1  algorithm. 

The  RREQ  message  counts  with  the  fields  Type,  destination  (broadcast), 
number  of jumps, sequence number,  destination  node, previous node. The  RREP 
message  includes  the  fields  Type,  destination,  sequence  number,  origin  node, 
message  sender  node.  When  the  z  node  receives  a  RREQ  message,  it  updates 
the  number  of  jumps  and  checks  the  destination  node,  if  it  is  its  neighbor  it 
sends  a  RREQ  placing  in  destination  the  address  of  the  neighbor  node  and  in 

Wireless  communication  system  for  a WASN 

67 

previous  node  it's  own  ID.  If  the  destination  node  is  not  its  neighbor,  then  it 
resends  the  message,  updating  the  number  of jumps  and  placing  it's  own  ID  in 
the  previous  node  field.  When  the  RREQ  reaches  it's  destination  node, this  node 
sends  a  RREP,  in  which  destination  is  the  base  node,  it's  own  ID  in  the  origin 
node,  and  in  the  sending  node  it  places  it's  own  ID.  This  RREP  is  sent  to  the 
node  which  is  indicated  in  the  previous  node  field  of  the  RREQ  message  being 
answered.  When  the  z  node  receives  a  RREP  message,  it  updates  it's  routing 
table  with  the  information  contained  in  the  message  (destination  node  =  origin 
node; next jump  =  sending  node). The  z node places  in the  sending  node  field  it's 
own  ID,  searches  in  the  routing  table  a  route  to  get  to  the  base  node  (previously 
discovered  with  M-to-1  algorithm)  and  it  sends  a  RREP  message. 

The  process  consists  of  flooding  the  network  with  the  RPRI  message.  After 
that,  the  base  node  sends  a  RREQ  message  to  know  the  route  to  get  to  the  z 
node.  The  base  node  waits  for  a  RREP  message  sent  by  the  z  node.  After  a  t 
period,  if  the  RREP  message  has  not  been  received,  a  RREQ  is  sent  again  with 
a  new  sequence  number;  if  the  RREP  message  is  received,  a  request  of  data  is 
sent  to  the  z  node  using  the  route  contained  in  the  RREP  message.  To  ask  for 
data  from  the  acquisition  card  to  the  z node,  a  REQUEST  message  is  employed. 

2.6  Access  node. 

The  access  node  controls  the  collection  of  data  generated  by  the  nodes  in  the 
network.  This node  consists of a personal  computer  that  communicates  wirelessly 
with  the  sensor  nodes  and  has  software  designed  for  the  collection  of  data  from 
the  nodes.  It's  installated  in  a  location  that  has  120V  AC  power  and  internet 
acces available. To endow wireless communication  to the  access node, a  multiport 
card  was  used  included  in  the  designer's  kit  by  Aerocomm.  That  card  includes 
an  AC4790  card  and  communication  options  via  RS232,  RS485  and  USB. 

2.7  Graphical  user  interface  for  the  control  and  collection  of  data 

and  a  W e b  page  for  remote  access. 

The  program  of  the  access  node  was  made  in  Lab View  7.1. The  program  sends 
the  intructions  necessary  for  the  download  of the  data  from  the  acquisition  card, 
using  packets  that  contain  appropiate  header  to  travel  thorugh  the  wireless  net(cid:173)
work  to  get  to  their  destination.  In  the  following  paragraphs  the  program  for 
control  and  collection  of  data  is  described. 

The  program  performs  the  control  funcions  and  the  collection  of  data  for  the 
sensor  network.  The  collection  of  data  can  be  manual  or  automatic.  In  manual 
mode,  the  user  has  to  select  the  desired  node  to  connect,  configures  some  pa(cid:173)
rameters  of  the  serial  communication  and  begins  to  download.  With  automatic 
download,  the  user  has to  program  beforehand  a list  of tasks. The  list  of tasks  in(cid:173)
dicates  the  hour  and  the  node  number  from  which  the  data  needs to  be  collected. 
In  both  cases,  manual  and  automatic,  at  the  end  of  each  succesful  download  the 
data  collected  is being  sent  via email  to the  registered  users  of the  system.  Figure 
6  shows  the  GUI  developed. 

68 

Magali  Cortez,  Jaime  Sanchez 

C*»C»5*tN«Xi» 

; Corfujuacwi 

Red de defbrmaciones  del  valle de  Mexicali 
Departs mento de  Sismologia. 

cicese 

[ 

<*mt» 

1 

I  0munm  1 
| 
[  Dwiwij* U«Jo 

CmcUdo 

Fig. 6.  Graphical  user  interface  for  the  control  and  collection  of  data. 

To have  remote  access to  the  wireless  sensor  network  via  internet,  a web  page 
as well  as  a  web  page  server  are  needed.  For  the  sake  of  simplicity,  the  web  page 
server  included  in  Lab VIEW  version  7.1  was  used,  which  allows  to  publish  web 
pages  that  contain  Virtual  Instruments.  This  way,  the  user  can  have  access  to 
the  same  program  installed  in  the  access  node  through  a  web  page.  The  web 
page  server  is  installed  in  the  computer  designated  as  the  access  node,  so  it  is 
necessary  for  that  computer  to  have  a  public  IP  address  so  that  the  users  can 
access  the  web  page. 

3  Test  scenario  and  results. 

The  system  was  tested  making  downloads  of  data  from  some  of the  sensor  nodes 
which  were  placed  inside  the  CICESE  campus,  where  an  ad  hoc  topology  was 
employed  and  a  GUI  ran  on  a  personal  computer.  The  transmitting  power  of 
the  AC4790  cards  was  10  dBm  and  the  maximum  distance  between  the  nodes 
was  300  m.  Of  course,  the  output  power  of  the  AC4790  can  be  set  up  to  1W  to 
achieve  greater  coverage. 

The  AdHoc  communication  between  the  nodes,  using  the  algorithm  based 

on  a  static  routing  table  was  satisfactory,  achieving  100  %  of  connections.  Nev(cid:173)
ertheless,  when  testing  the  system  with  the  M-to-1  algorithm  and  the  forward 
communicating  algorithm,  problems  caused  by collisions between  broadcast  mes(cid:173)
sages appeared.  This problem is related to the AC4790 card, which cannot  resolve 
the  collisions  generated  by  sending  broadcast  messages  at  the  same  time  by  dif(cid:173)
ferent  nodes.  The  solution  to  that  problem  was  not  addressed  in  this  work,  and 
is  a  pending  task. 

Wireless  communication  system  for  a WASN 

69 

4  Conclusions 

The  wide  area  wireless  communication  system  designed  provides  ad  hoc  com(cid:173)
munication  using  devices  intended  for  point  to  point  links.  The  results  obtained 
were satisfactory,  achieving multi jump  communication  in a testing  network  plat(cid:173)
form.  In  principle,  the  system  designed  tries  to  give  a  soultion  to  the  problem  of 
data  collection  imposed  by  the  RDEFVM.  However,  the  system  developed  can 
be  used  in  any  application  that  requires  long range  wireless  communications  and 
that  employs  the  CR10X  data  acquisition  card  from  Campbell  Scientific. 

A c k n o w l e d g m e n t s .  The  authors  want  to  thank  CONACYT,  for  their  support 
for  project  No.  7410  " Deformaciones  de  la  Corteza  en  el  Valle  de  Mexicali",  in 
charge  of  Dr.  Ewa  Glowacka,  from  which  this  work  was  originated. 

References 

1.  Lou W.:  An efficient  N-to-1 multipath  routing  protocol  in wireless  sensor  networks, 
2nd  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Mobile  Ad-hoc  and  Sensor  Systems,  Wash(cid:173)
ington  DC.  (2005). 

2.  Agrawal  D.  P.,  Biswas  R.,  Jain  N.,  Mukherjee  A.,  Sekhar  S.  y  Gupta  A.:  Sensor 

systems: state  of the  art  and  future  challenges. En: Wu J.  (ed.). Handbook  on theo(cid:173)
retical  and  algorithmic  aspects of sensor,  ad  hoc wireless, and  peer-to-peer  network. 
Auerbach  Publications,  New York  (2005)  318-345. 

3.  Haenggi  M.:  Opportunities  and  Challenges  in  Wireless  Sensor  Networks.  En:  Ilyas 
M. y  Mahgoub  I.  (ed.).  Handbook  of  sensor  networks:  compact  wireless  and  wired 
sensing  systems.  CRC  Press,  Florida  (2005)  1-1. 

4.  RDEFVM:  http://sismologia.cicese.mx/Redes/Rdefvm.html(2006) 
5.  Aerocomm:  AC4790  900 MHz  OEM transceivers.  Users Manual, version  1.3  (2006). 
6.  Microchip: 
http://wwl.microchip.com/downloads/en/DeviceDoc/39631B. 
pdf(2006) 

7.  Heinzelman  W.R.,  Kulik  J.  y  Balakrishnan  H.: Adaptive  protocols  for  information 
dissemination  in wireless sensor networks. 5th annual ACM/IEEE  international  con(cid:173)
ference  on  Mobile  computing  and  networking  (1999)  174-185. 

8.  Perkins  C.  E.  y  Royer  E.  M.:  Ad  hoc  On-Demand  Distance  Vector  Routing.  2nd 

IEEE  Workshop  on  Mobile  Computing  Systems  and  Applications  (1999)  90-100. 

