Mobile Game-Based Methodology for Science Learning 

Jaime Sánchez, Alvaro Salinas, and Mauricio Sáenz 

Department of Computer Science 

University of Chile 

{jsanchez,msaenz}@dcc.uchile.cl, asalinas@c5.cl 

Abstract.  This  work  presents  the  features  and  results  of  a  problem-solving 
collaborative  game  for  8th  graders  science  classes’  curriculum.  Software  for 
pocketPC  was  developed  for  this  game,  based  on  a  complete  framework 
methodology  with  students  and  teachers.  From  our  point  of  view,  the  key  to 
integrate  mobile  devices  into  school  is  the  methodological  framework  which 
provides meaning; technology by itself does not contribute much to education. 
The  evaluation  study  was  focused  on  software  usability  and  the  results  in  the 
application  of  the  methodology,  observing  their  performance  in  problemsolving 
 skills.  A  high  degree  of  user  satisfaction  with  the  final  product  was 
found.  They  were  motivated  to  participate  actively  in  the  proposed  tasks. 
Results  indicate  that  the  experience  contributed  to  the  development  of  the 
student’s  problem-solving  skills  obtaining  positive  gains  as  a  result  of  this 
experience. 

Keywords: Children, science, PDA, pocketPC, gaming, learning. 

1   Introduction 

This research work describes and analyzes some results of the Biology Learning with 
Mobile Technology project. The goal of the project is to design, develop, apply, and 
evaluate  a  new  pedagogical  methodology  based  on  interactive  games  for  mobile 
devices  (PDA).  The  software  is  oriented  to  developing  problem-solving  skills  in 
science classes for 8th graders. 

Information  and  communication  technologies  do  not  have  much  contribute  to 
education by themselves. The people, models, methodologies and strategies are those 
that determine changes, innovation and impact on learning. Also, no task or particular 
activity  influence  learning  in  a  deep  and  final  way,  rather,  it  is  the  learning  culture 
(with of without technologies) that can impact it considerably. 

Some  researchers  have  focused  on  understanding  what  Information  and 
Communication Technologies, (ICT) integration into curriculum is about [21], how to 
do it, and its consequences [13]. ICT integration consists in “making ICT entirely part 
of the curriculum as a part of a system, integrating them to educational principles and 
didactic  for  the  learning  process”  [19].  ICT  must  be  integrated  to  relevant  and 
legitimate  educational  knowledge,  practices,  and  available  resources  in  the  school 
context. 

J. Jacko (Ed.): Human-Computer Interaction, Part IV, HCII 2007, LNCS 4553, pp. 322–331, 2007. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007 

 

Mobile Game-Based Methodology for Science Learning 

323 

One  of  the  main  contributions  of  ICTs  to  education  is  the  support  to  the 
development of high order cognitive skills, such as problem solving, communication 
skills, and information management.  

Numerous authors have described problem-solving skills as a fundamental activity 
in  the  learning  process  and  as  crucial  competition  ability  nowadays.  Even  though 
some authors identify the different steps involved in solving a problem, most of them 
agree in those proposed by Polya as a methodology to solve problems: understanding 
the problem, designing a strategy, putting the strategy into practice and checking the 
solution [16]. 

One  of  the  most  common  student  practices  when  using  ICT  is  to  play  computer 
games. However, the potential of the games in education has not been exploited yet. 
Games and education appear like separated spaces, even though games produce a high 
commitment  and  motivation  in  learners  [11]  and  these  attributes  can  be  useful  to 
improve learning activities. 

Diverse authors  have analyzed the  impact of games on education. Some of them 
believe that games can promote higher order learning, such as increased meaningful 
dialogues  among  learners  [12].  Other  studies  describe  positive  effects  of  games  on 
social  skills  [15].  Authors  synthesize  the  effects  of  games  on  education  to  enhance 
learning through visualization, experimentation, and creativity of play, [1].  

Technology  has  meaning  when  making  specific  and  distinctive  contributions  to 
improve  education.  This  is  especially  important  when  there  are  technologies  (like 
computers) available in the same contexts where the PDA is embedded. PDAs have 
been  described  as  low  cost  devices,  comprising  data  storage  and  processing 
capacities,  mobile  capabilities,  ready-to-use,  and,  therefore,  they  can  be  easily 
integrated to other devices, such as desktop computers [17]. 

Current literature has begun to study the behavior of people who daily carry work 
or  entertainment  tools  [2]  as  a  way  of  improving  the  design  of  mobile  devices  like 
PDAs  and  cell  phones  [7].  Therefore,  the  design  of  mobile  devices  from  observing 
daily actual behaviors of end-users using them begins to create a new understanding 
of the construction of user-centered scenarios [8,10] 

Several authors have posed the question about the pedagogical potential of mobile 
devices [4,6,9]. Some experiences have shown that PDAs are most often used as tools 
to  aid  in  research  and  alternatives  to  paper-based  tasks  and  group  collaboration 
activities  [5].  A  research  experience  using  PDAs  in  collaborative  learning  has  been 
developed by profiting from mobility features of the device, making learning a more 
natural process, and also promoting negotiation concepts in the classroom [3]. 

The  overcrowding  of  mobile  devices,  which  integrate  functionality  and  allow  a 
high level of processing and communication, reveals an important potential on the use 
of  Personal  Digital  Assistants  (PDA)  for  educational  purposes.  Their  processing 
capabilities, the feasibility of multimedia integration and communication possibilities 
are key features to create playful and attractive activities for students. 

2   Biology Learning with Mobile Technology  

The  methodology  used  in  the  project  presented  here  is  problem-solving.  This 
methodology is framed within learning constructivism in which learners are the main 

324 

J. Sánchez, A. Salinas, and M. Sáenz 

actor in their learning process. Basically, the goal of problem solving methodology is 
that  children  adapt  the  four  fundamental  steps  involved  in  problem-solving:  (1) 
Understand  the  problem,  (2)  Trace  a  solution  strategy,  (3)  Put  the  strategy  into 
practice, and (4) Check results.  

A  biological  problem  was  presented  to  the  students  to  be  solved  in  a  real-time 
strategy game for pocketPC named Evolution. Learners have to keep and grow four 
animal classes (fish, amphibian, reptiles and bird), each one with three species. The 
interaction  is  made  by  different  actions  which  affect  positively  or  negatively  in  the 
preservation  and  development  of  each  species  within  changing  and  unknown 
environments. The problem is faced in teams of four learners and each student had to 
adopt a species. 

Learners had to follow three main stages: fieldtrip to the zoo, classroom work and 

final activity. 
 
Fieldtrip  to  the  Zoo.  The  first  part  of  the  methodology  consisted  in  taking  out  the 
students  to  a  fieldtrip  in  a  zoo,  so  they  could  understand  key  concepts  for  the 
development  of  the  fore  coming  stages.  In  this  activity,  and  also  in  the  next  ones, 
learners must solve a problem which is functional for solving the whole game main 
problem.  At  this  stage  learners  interacted  with  trivia  software  for  pocketPC 
(BuinZoo), which guided them and presented riddles that must be solved during the 
visit to the zoo. 

 

In  order  to  solve  the  riddles,  learners  went  to  the  zoo  seeking  information  and 
assisted  with  the  guide  and  support  provided  by  the  software.  Each  team  member 
solved a different riddle which complements with the others from different members, 
so they can solve the main problem. 

When a student finished the test, he or she could help the team companions. Once a 
team ended, the members gathered and shared relevant information of the work done. 
Finally, each team presented their major conclusions to the problem posed through a 
forum moderated by the teacher. 
 
Classroom  Work.  Following  the  fieldtrip  learners  began  to  play  at  the  classroom 
with  the  game  Evolution.  This  stage  lasted  four  weeks  and  the  students  rotate  their 
interaction  with  different  species.  Likewise,  during  this  time  learners  reinforce 
contents embedded in the game, along with problem-solving tasks. 

During this stage two activities were implemented in the classroom: 1. Game with 
the PDA: students were dedicated to play Evolution. The time session was used for 
manipulating  species  and  exploring  the  possibilities  offered  by  key  variables 
manipulated for evolution. Along with this, learners continued evaluating, sharing and 
analyzing  individual  and  team  strategies  with  the  rest  of  the  team.  From  lesson  to 
lesson students designed, implemented and evaluated strategies designed to solve the 
problem. 2. Approaching to concepts: lessons close to game sessions were planned 
in such a way that the teacher could systematize the phenomena observed by learners 
during  the  game  and  provide  key  content  to  understand  and  interpret  the  evolution 
phenomenon.  This  content  also  allowed  improving  the  learner’s  performance  in  the 
game. 
 

 

Mobile Game-Based Methodology for Science Learning 

325 

Final Activity. To observe the results of the work done during the previous stages, a 
web  application  was  implemented  to  allow  students  to  observe  a  simulation  of  the 
evolution  of  the  species  in  the  same  environment.  This  simulation,  using  simplified 
parameters, shows what would happen with the species grown by the students using a 
bigger  time  scale.  Hence,  an  environment  with  biological  diversity  and  a  sufficient 
number of well grown individuals allow the sustainability of the environment in the 
time being (see Figure 1). The idea behind this system was that learners could make 
their  own  daily  tracking,  watching  the  status  of  the  ecosystem  resulting  from  game 
activities. 

 

Fig. 1. Web Simulation 

3   Evolution 

The  game  Evolution  was  designed  and  developed  with  real  time  strategy  game 
features.  The  purpose  was  to  simulate  a  real  biological  process,  where  the  flow  of 
time is a key variable since it affects living beings mortality and feeding. This type of 
game  also  allows  the  development  of  synchronized  action  between  different  users 
units and the adversary. 

interaction 

The  user’s 

in  Evolution  presents  different  components.  The 
environment  is  composed  by  rules  which  affect  the  natural  behavior  of  the  present 
animals. It includes environment variables, which define the type and behavior of the 
species. The student, through simulated actions (mortality, reproduction, feeding and 
attack) generates changes in the environment status, restricted by defined rules. 

The  game  displays  an  attractive  interface,  playful  and  intuitive.  This  is  a  key 
element to the game experience, since keeping the users attention is a very important 
matter in  gaming.  For this purpose, graphic and interaction concepts of this type of 
game  were  re-used,  focusing  on  the  interface  understanding.  The  interface  of  the 
game  is  divided  in  four  main  parts:  1.  Description:  This  sector  shows  help 
descriptions  to  the  user.  These  descriptions  are  dynamic  depending  on  the  current 
context of the game. For example, if the user has selected certain unit, the description  
 

326 

J. Sánchez, A. Salinas, and M. Sáenz 

Fig. 2. Interface of Evolution 

 

will consist on relevant data associated to that unit. 2. Map: This is the main zone of 
the game. This zone shows all events and provides access to all actions available in 
the game (feeding, attacking, moving, reproducing and evolving units). 3. Mini Map: 
This is a zoom out of the complete map, showing a general vision of all units. User 
and enemy units are represented by a green and red square respectively, while nests 
are represented by a white square. 4. Options Menu: There are three options in this 
menu, from left to right: show evolving zone in the mini map, game pause/play, and 
go to game menu (see Figure 2). 

4   Usability Study 

Expert  Evaluation.  This  evaluation  was  carried  out  by  two  HCI  experts  ages 
between  20  and  25  years  old,  assisted  by  a  member  of  the  development  team.  We 
used  heuristic  evaluation  questionnaires  built  from  Schneiderman  golden  rules  [20] 
and  Nielsen  usability  heuristics  [14].  The  resulting  test  consisted  in  12  heuristics 
embracing a total of 25 items. They are statements on which experts have to indicate 
their appreciation in a Likert-type scale from strongly agree to strongly disagree. The 
evaluation was carried out by each expert during a session of 45 minutes by using a 
first  prototype.  During  the  session,  the  software  was  shown  to  experts.  Then,  they 
explored the software freely during 30 minutes. Finally, they answered the Heuristic 
Evaluation Questionnaire.  

Experts  highly  accepted  the  software.  On  the  average,  the  game  obtained  an 
appreciation score of 3.6 out of 5 (see Figure 3). Out the 11 heuristics evaluated by 
experts, 8 obtained scores situated in the average or above the average score. Only 3 
heuristics were located below the average score. 

The  heuristics  that  presented  the  lowest  score  in  the  evaluation  were  “error 
prevention”, “help users to recognize, diagnose and recover from error” and “help and 
documentation” during the game. One of the most important reasons that can explain 
the low score obtained in these three heuristics was the early implementation of this 
test  during  software  design  and  development  cycle.  However,  the  highest  scores 
obtained corresponded to the heuristics that are considered a standard for videogames 
(and that learners are used to). The results of this testing allowed to correct bugs and 
improve the interface design of the application, such as colors, icons and characters. 

 

Mobile Game-Based Methodology for Science Learning 

327 

Fig. 3. Heuristic Evaluation 

 

Cognitive walkthrough methods were also implemented. Experts assumed the role 
of the end-users, developing tasks in an early prototype of the game. They played as if 
the  software  was  finished  and  solved  tasks  in  the  role  of  a  typical  user.  Each  step 
carried  out  by  the  expert  was  monitored,  looking  for  those  situations  in  which  the 
interface blocked and prevented him or her to finish the task or to follow procedures 
unnecessarily  complex.  This  information  allowed  us  to  identify  critical  aspects  to 
improve in the interface. 

Experts  could  complete  all  tasks  without  relevant  difficulties.  Experts  detected 
some  bugs  that  were  later  eliminated,  suggested  the  improvement  of  the  feedback 
provided by each action, and the correction of some errors.  
 
End-User  Evaluation.  The  sample  consisted  in  76  teenagers  from  8th  grade,  from 
three primary  schools of  Santiago de  Chile. The sample  selection  was based on the 
diversity  criteria  according  to  socio-economical  level  and  academic  results  from 
standard tests. In this test the Evolution game was evaluated. 

software 

The end-user evaluation was implemented through the following stages: software 
introduction, 
the  End-User  Usability 
Questionnaire  [18]  and  evaluation.  The  questionnaire  consisted  of  21  closed 
questions,  using  a  Likert-type  scale  of  5  points  from  “strongly  agree”  to  “strongly 
disagree”. Each answer was matched to a score scale from 5 to 1 respectively. 

interaction,  application  of 

The  results  obtained  can  be  grouped  in  5  categories:  (1)  Game  Satisfaction,  (2) 
Game Control, (3) Game Usage, (4) Game Sounds Quality and (5) Game Image and 
Color Quality. 

The  field  with  the  higher  score  was  the  one  related  to  game  image  and  color 
quality, which reveals an attractive and entertaining user interface. Game sounds were 
also evaluated with a high score. They were pleasant and visible to evaluators. There 
were  no  important  differences  between  women  and  men.  There  was  a  high  general 
satisfaction  with  the  game,  scoring  an  average  of  4.2  (see  Figure  4).  Two  very 
important  aspects  were  also  evaluated:  whether  the  user  would  play  again,  and 
whether  they  would  recommend  the  game  to  other  youngsters.  These  aspects  were 
highly scored too, obtaining  a total of 4 points out of 5. Both items  were evaluated 
highly by men and women.  

The evaluation of the use of the game, based on the perception that the game was 
interactive, user friendly, easy to use, motivating and with a interface that allows the 
user to do everything in a simple and quick way, obtained a high score (4.1 out of 5),  
 

328 

J. Sánchez, A. Salinas, and M. Sáenz 

Fig. 4. End-User Usability Results 

 

stating clearly that the user interface and interaction were well designed for this type 
of users (see Figure 4). 

It was important for users that they felt they are in total control of the game; they 
could do different actions when consider it was advisable, or stopped doing them as 
well.  This  part  of  the  evaluations  scored  the  lowest  of  all  variables  (see  Figure  4), 
which could be explained by the type of game presented, where many actions could 
not be controlled by the user. 

There were difference between the results obtained by  men and  women on game 
usage and control. In both cases the difference was about 0.5 points, which should be 
highlighted.  This  difference 
interaction  and 
understanding  more  difficult  than  men.  Along  with  this,  they  did  not  feel  in  total 
control of the game. 

that  women  found  game 

tells 

5   Problem Solving Competitions 

The measurement of problem-solving competitions was made by using a survey built 
with  3  dimensional  resolution  scales.  This  survey  was  applied  to  students  who 
participated during the whole project and to a control group who did not participate in 
the study. The scale records the report made by the students concerning the frequency 
of the application of typical problem-solving procedures in their daily life. 

Each dimension conform subscales measured by several items, whose scores vary 
from  1  to  5.  By  using  this  subscale,  the  lower  the  score,  the  less  frequency  the 
students  apply  a  series  of  procedures  related  to  planning,  designing  strategies  and 
evaluation. 

As  depicted  in  figure  5,  the  average  score  obtained  in  each  the  sub-scale  varied 
from  3.6  to  4.2  points.  In  each  subscale,  the  experimental  group  obtained  a  score a 
little higher than the control group. The dimension in which both groups obtained the 
higher  scores  was  strategy,  but  the  scale  that  presented  the  biggest  difference  was 
planning.  This  is  precisely  the  subscale  where  the  difference  between  the 
experimental and control groups  was statistically significant. This  means that,  when 
controlling  other  variables,  the  activities  performed  in  the  project  would  improve 
planning  strategies  in  problem-solving.  In  the  evaluation  index  of  strategy  for  daily 
life the differences were not significant by a small margin. 
 

 

Mobile Game-Based Methodology for Science Learning 

329 

Fig. 5. Subscale Scoring on Daily Life Problem-Solving 

 

We  also  applied  a  problem-solving  performance  test.  The  participants  were  26 
groups of 4 students each. From each of the participant classes plus the participants 
from the control group, we selected randomly 2 teams of students. This test consisted 
in that  the students  had to solve a problem during 10  minutes. The problem  was  to 
build  a  route  which  joined  a  defined  amount  of  dots  over  a  surface,  considering 
special requirements and restrictions. The target, requirements, and restrictions were 
given on paper to each student. The performance of the students was observed by 2 
evaluators. Once the test  was finished, a  few questions, both oral and  written,  were 
asked to the students about the experience. 

The  observations  made  during  this  test  showed  a  small  improvement  in  those 
students  from  experimental  group  over  the  control  group. In  general,  these  students 
tended to organize faster and to discuss more between them. Nevertheless, the most 
interesting  difference  between  both  groups  was  that  the  students  from  the 
experimental  group  followed  the  whole problem-solving cycle, including evaluation 
of  obtained  results  and  comparing  them  with  the  requirements  presented  at  the 
beginning of the work. 

6   Conclusions 

The  Evolution  game  was  motivating  for  users,  producing  satisfaction  and  desire  to 
recommend it to others and to play again. Sounds and images used in the game were 
pleasant to users and allowed to convey information. 

Integrating  games  into  education  is  not  easy  to  achieve.  There  is  an  attempt  to 
articulate  playful  concepts  with  complex  concepts,  quickness  with  reflection.  Our 
game  integrated  these  concepts  to  a  level  we  could  define  as  procedural:  students 
manipulated  variables  to  achieve  the  evolution  of  their  species.  Nevertheless,  the 
declarative level was the teacher task out of schedule. Then, they researched over the 
Internet, discussed concepts, and systematized information. We believe that this first 
experience could be improved and represent a promising future line of work. 

In more global terms, users were satisfied with the project. One of the things most 
remarked  by  users  was  the  game  contribution  to  learning,  and  the  newness  and 
mobility  of  the  used  technology,  which  allowed  taking  advantage  of  places  like  the 
zoo for curricular purposes. 

330 

J. Sánchez, A. Salinas, and M. Sáenz 

One of the most remarkable aspects was the commitment of learners with the task 
performed.  The  literature  about  the  use  of  games  in  education  remarks  the 
commitment  with  the  task  as  one  of  the  strongest  aspects  and  one  of  the  main 
contributions of games to learning. Participant teachers and students agreed that the 
commitment produced, even on those times where the task was complex and hard for 
learners. This is more interesting when learners often had little tolerance to hard work 
and  frustration  from  the  harder  tasks.  We  believe  this  is  a  very  valuable  and 
interesting  clue  worth  of  further  research:  how  the  use  of  games  in  education  can 
increment work skills and solve complex problems, and at the same time allowing the 
handling and management of learner’s frustration. In one of the visits to BuinZoo a 
person who was visiting the zoo approached a research team member asking how we 
achieved that students worked so focused and well, even in a context of little control 
from teachers. The answer was the focus of the activity they were involved using the 
PDA:  students  were  working  not  to  pursue  a  grade  mark  or  because  someone  was 
controlling  their  work.  Rather,  they  were  working  because  they  were  interested  in 
doing so. 

We also found that the  methodology  used had an impact  on the problem-solving 
competitions of learners, but the results indicated that the impact was significant only 
on  one  dimension  out  of  the  three  analyzed.  Our  interpretation  of  this  is  that  the 
application  was in a  short period of time to produce an impact in all dimensions of 
problem-solving. This should be explored more fully in future studies. 

We believe that the development of games with educational purposes using mobile 
devices  is  rewarding  and  stimulating.  Our  work  has  been  guided  by  the  interest  of 
developing  a  game  with  logic  close  to  the  most  attractive  games  in  the  market, 
integrating  learning  contents.  We  believe  it  is  necessary  to  continue  the  study  of 
learningembedded 
games, meaning that a good performance of the game is possible 
when  the  contents  are  learned.  At  the  same  time,  we  believe  that  providing  spatial 
reality to learning (unbinding it to specific places such as the classroom and granting 
mobility  to  students  who  want  to  move  by  nature)  open  new  possibilities  to  tailor 
learning to the learners  way of being.   
 
Acknowledgments. This report was funded by the Alliance for Education Program, 
Microsoft Corporation, Project Biology Learning with Mobile Technology “ABTm - 
MICROSOFT 2006”.  

References 

1.  Amory,  A.,  Naicker,  K.,  Vincent,  J.,  Adams,  C.:  The  Use  of  Computer  Games  as  an 
Educational Tool: Identification of Appropriate Game Types and Game Elements. British 
Journal of Educational Technology 30(4), 311–321 (October 1999) 

2.  Chipcase, J., Persson, P.: What, how and why people carry what they do. In: Proceedings 
of  the  Designing  for  User  Experience  Conference,  DUX05,  (March  17  2006)  http:// 
www.dux2005.org Accessed 

3.  Cortez,  C.,  Nussbaum,  M.,  López,  X.,  Rodríguez,  P.,  Santelices,  R.,  Rosasw,  R., 
Marianovz,  V.:  Teachers’  support  with  ad-hoc  collaborative  Networks.  Journal  of 
Computer Assisted Learning 21, 171–180 (2005) 

 

Mobile Game-Based Methodology for Science Learning 

331 

4.  Csete, J., Wong, Y., Vogel, D.: Mobile devices in and out the classroom. In: Cantoni, L., 

McLoughlin (eds.) Proceedings of ED-MEDIA 2004, pp. 4729–4736 (2004) 

5.  Curtis, M., Luchini, K., Bobrowsky, W., Quintana, C., Soloway, E.: Handheld use in K12.
 A descriptive account. In: Proceedings of the WMTE’02, pp. 22–30 (2002) 

6.  Facer, K., Joiner, R., Stanton, D., Reid, J., Hull, R., Kirk, D.: Savannah: mobile gaming 
and  learning?  Journal  of  Computer  Assisted  Learning,  vol.  20,  pp.  399–409,  Blackwell 
Publishing Ltd (2004) 

7.  Haddon,  L.:  Domestication  and  Mobile  Telephony.  Machines  that  Become  Us  Rutgers 
University,  New  Jersey,  US  (April  18-19  2001)  (Accessed  March  17  2006).  http:// 
members.aol.com/leshaddon/Domestication.html 

8.  Holtzblatt,  K.:  Designing  for  the  mobile  device:  Experiences,  challenges,  and  methods. 

Communications of the ACM 48, 33–35 (July 7 2005) 

9.  James,  J.,  Beaton,  B.,  Csete,  J.,  Vogel,  D.:  Mobile  educational  games.  In:  Lassner,  D., 

McNaught, C. (eds.) Proceedings of ED-MEDIA 2003, pp. 801–802 (2003) 

10.  Kangas,  E.,  Kinnunen,  T.:  Applying  user/centered  design  to  mobile  application 

development. Communications of the ACM 48(7), 55–59 (July 7 2005) 

11.  Klopfer,  E.,  Yoon,  S.:  Developing  Games  and  Simulations  for  Today  and  Tomorrow’s 
tech  Savvy  Youth  TechTrends.  Linking  Research  &  Practice  to  Improve  Learning,  vol. 
49(3), pp. 33–41 (May/June2005) 

12.  McDonald, K., Hannafin, R.: Using web-based computer games to meet the demands of 
today’s high stakes testing: A mixed method inquiry. Journal of Research on Technology 
in Education 55(4), 459–472 (2003) 

13.  Merrill,  P.,  Hammons,  K.,  Vincent,  B.,  Reynolds,  P.,  Cristiansen,  L.,  Tolman,  M.: 

Computers in Education (Third Edition). Allyn & Bacon, Boston (1996) 

14.  Nielen,  J.:  Usability  engineering,  1st  edn.  p.  362.  Morgan  Kaufmann  Publishers,  

New York (1994) 

15.  Pellegrini, A., Blatchford, P., Kentaro, B.: A Short-term Longitudinal Study of Children’s 
Playground Games in Primary School: Implications for Adjustment to School and Social 
Adjustment in the USA and the UK. Social Development 13(1), 107–123 (February 2004) 

16.  Polya, G.: How to Solve It, 2nd edn. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ (1957) 
17.  Salinas, A., Sánchez, J.: PDAs and Ubiquitous Computing in the School. Human Centered 

Technology Workshop 2006, Pori, Finland, June 11-13, 2006, pp. 249–258 ( 2006) 

18.  Sánchez,  J.:  End-user  and  facilitator  questionnaire  for  Software  Usability.  Usability 

evaluation test. University of Chile (2003) 

19.  Sánchez,  J.:  Integración  curricular  de  TICs.  Conceptos  y  modelos.  Revista  Enfoques 

Educacionales 5(1), 51–65 (2003) 

20.  Schneiderman,  B.,  Plaisant,  C.:  Designing  the  User  Interface:  Strategies  for  Effective 

Human-Computer Interaction, p. 652. Addison Wesley, New York (2004) 

21.  Swan,  K.,  Holmes,  A.,  Vargas,  J.:  Situated  Professional  Development  and  Technology 
Integration: The Capital Area  Technology and Inquiry in Education (CATIE) Mentoring 
Program. JI. Of Technology and Teacher Education 10 (2), 169–190 (2002) 

