NOPPA 

NAVIGATION AND GUIDANCE SYSTEM FOR THE BLIND 

Virtanen Ari , Koskinen Sami 

VTT Industrial Systems 

1.  Introduction 

The presented information server concept, developed at VTT, is a user-centred and task 
oriented client-server approach for solving informational needs of special user groups. This 
paper  describes  application  of  the  concept  for  producing  an  unbroken  trip  chain  for  the 
visually impaired. The goal of the study was to build a navigational aid for the visually 
impaired  using  commercial  passenger  information  and  personal  navigation  services 
without laborious and expensive changes in the current infrastructure.  

Generic  travelling  difficulties  for  the  visually  impaired  are  localisation  and  environment 
perception, selecting and maintaining correct heading, and detecting obstacles above waist 
and unexpected road works. 

There have been numerous research projects about creating electronic travel aids (ETA) for 
visually impaired persons. These projects usually have concentrated on solving one specific 
problem. The result has been usually technically simple device, which may be difficult to 
use.  Because  the  visually  impaired  have  several  problems,  they  would  have  to  acquire  a 
wheelbarrow to take with all these devices to carry off everyday life. 

Development of travelling aids based on positioning has a long history, the use of GPS has 
been researched since the late 80’s and since then there have been many research projects 
like Mobic [1], Drishti [2] and Brunel Navigation System for The Blind [3], and commercial 
products like Sendero Groups BrailleNote GPS [4] and VisuAide's Trekker [5] addressing 
GPS based ETA for the visually impaired. Navigation systems have usually worked well in 
small-scale implementations, but a large-scale implementation will be extremely expensive 
(especially with beacon based navigation systems). Percentage of visually impaired persons 
of  the  whole  population  is  less  than  1.5  %  in  developed  countries;  therefore  large 
investments  to  the  infrastructure  are  not  reasonable.  Still,  visually  impaired  persons  have 
equal rights to achieve the same services as all other citizens. Despite intensive research and 
development,  electronic  travelling  aids  for  the  visually  impaired  have  not  yet  become 
common. This indicates that the problems at hand are not easy to solve.  

The  most  important  guidance  aids  for  the  visually  impaired  are  still  the  white  cane  and 
guide  dog.  Electronic  travelling  aids  should  be  considered  as  supplementary  equipment. 
What we need is a travelling aid that produces a small amount of navigational information 
and  does  not  disturb  other  information  perceived  from  the  environment.  Further,  the 
evaluation  of  the  device  should  be  based  on  the  benefits  it  produces  not  the  amount  of 
information it generates. 

1 

2.  NOPPA architecture 

VTT's  Information  server  concept  aims  to  utilise  commercial  services  and  devices  for 
improving public transport accessibility with creating access to passenger information with a 
personal mobile device rather than building physical infrastructure.  

Research  and  development  of  the  concept  was  done  in  a  research  project  NOPPA 
(Navigation and guidance for the visually impaired) [6], which started at June 2002 and ends 
of the year 2004. Project pilots a personal navigation system for the visually impaired, which 
produces a unbroken trip chain for the visually impaired. 

The most important building blocks of the system are mobile Internet, mobile phones and 
personal navigation systems and services. For unbroken trip chain for the visually impaired 
there  are  requirements  for  continuous,  general  use  positioning  techniques,  continuous 
(Internet) access to passenger information and availability of map data accurate enough for 
users'  needs.  For  example  there  aren't  generally  maps  available,  which  would  include 
pavement  information  or  information  about  large  public  premises  either.  Door-to-door 
guidance would require map data including entrances and continuous guidance would even 
require indoor maps and indoor positioning, which are generally unavailable.  

Design goals of the NOPPA -guidance system were: 

(cid:137)  Easy and fast to use 
(cid:137)  Flexibility 
(cid:137)  Affordable to the user 
(cid:137)  Access to public transportation and passenger information systems   

INFORMATION SERVER

INFORMATION
MANAGEMENT

SERVICE

INTEGRATION

COMMAND

INTERPRETER

SPEECH 

RECOGNISER

LOCAL
INFORMATION

GPRS

BLUETOOTH

WLAN

INTERNET

PASSENGER
INFORMATION

REALTIME

INFORMATION

ROUTE PLANNERS

NEWS

WEATHER

MICROPHONE

GPS

SPEAKER

GSM
SMS

OBSTACLE
DETECTION

PERSONAL

INFORMATION AND

SETTINGS

POSITIONING

GUIDANCE

Figure 1. Architecture of the NOPPA guidance system. 

2 

Integration of products and services for personal navigation  

(cid:137)  Applicable both indoors and outdoors 
(cid:137) 
(cid:137)  Modular, easy to update, easy to add functions 
(cid:137)  Speech user interface. 

To fulfil these requirements, we created an architecture presented in Figure 1. Because of 
low  processing  capacity  of  the  mobile  terminal  and  a  low  bandwidth  wireless  data 
connection, most of the work is done in the Information server. Data flow between mobile 
client and Information server is minimized, which keeps the communication costs low and 
shortens response time. 

2.1 

Information server 

The Information Server in the architecture is an interpreter between the user and information 
systems. It collects filters and integrates information from different sources and delivers only 
the results to the user. For the visually impaired speech user interface is a natural choice. If 
the users are deaf, user interface based on text and visual information is used instead. 

The  server  constructs  a  route  plan,  which  is  transferred  to  the  terminal.  Terminal  is 
responsible  for  route  following and guidance functions. It however reports its coordinates 
periodically  to  the  server  which  could  follow  the  progress  of  the  journey  and  possible 
changes and disturbances concerning the rest of the journey. Real time information plays an 
important role through the unbroken trip chain. 

Route  following  and  guidance  is  done  in  the  terminal,  because  these  are  time  critical 
functions and because of unreliable wireless connection. Although GPRS connection is often 
considered  continuous,  in  practise  it  is  not.  Implementation  of  guidance  in  the  terminal 
makes it available even when the connection to the server is temporarily off. 

2.2  The Prototype 

The prototype of the terminal is built on a commercial mobile phone. The system carries out 
following characteristics 

(cid:137)  Speech user interface (Finnish)  
(cid:137)  Route planner (commuter and intercity traffic both bus and train) 
(cid:137)  Access to bus and train real time information 
(cid:137)  Guidance and route following during a trip 
(cid:137)  Personal stop announcements in-vehicle 
(cid:137)  Roadwork information 
(cid:137)  Airport departures (domestic flights), real time information 
(cid:137)  News, watch, local weather, memo  
(cid:137)  GSM phone and SMS services 
(cid:137)  GPS, GSM positioning, pedometer, compass 
(cid:137)  Bluetooth, GPRS (WLAN) connectivity 
(cid:137) 
(cid:137)  Own recorded walking routes with location based comments 

Indoor navigation system based on Bluetooth or WLAN positioning  

User evaluation tests are planned for autumn 2004. In the tests the value of the information 
provided is under evaluation not usability of the device.  

3 

Figure 2. A visually impaired NOPPA navigation system [1] user entering a bus. 

 

 

Figure 3. Noppa prototype terminal. 

 

3.  Visually impaired persons and unbroken trip chain 

If we examine problems a visually impaired person meets when using public transport, we 
recognize the following list (depends slightly of the transportation mean): 

4 

trip planning, finding a stop/station, finding an entrance to the station, navigating inside the 
station, finding the right platform and waiting place, knowing when the right vehicle arrives, 
finding a vehicle entrance, payment, finding a seat, depart on right stop, navigating inside the 
station, finding the exit of the station and finding the destination. 

Most of these tasks are trivial for the sighted, but very difficult for the visually impaired. 
There are cases when a blind person has spent several hours on the bus stop, because he 
couldn't recognise arrival of the right vehicle. 

Nevertheless, in our studies we couldn't find any specific information needs for the visually 
impaired. Information needed is either available for the sighted, existing but not accessible, 
or would be useful for all passengers. However, the means for a visually impaired person to 
reach the information is different. This is an important factor to take into account when new 
passenger information services are designed. 

To produce unbroken trip chain for visually impaired, we have to switch seamlessly between 
different modes of operation during the trip (see Figure 4). This requires that system must be 
context aware to recognise transition points and change automatically its mode of operation 
accordingly. 

Figure 4. Unbroken trip chain and different operation modes. 

 

3.1  Trip planning 

All planning is based on commercial journey planners. Helsinki metropolitan area (Helsinki, 
Vantaa, Espoo and Kauniainen) is covered by one planner [7], which covers local bus, tram, 
metro and local train traffic. A speech user interface for the journey planner was constructed 
in the server. Speech recognition software is speaker independent and requires street names 
from these cities to accomplish recognition. List of 10 000 street names is acquired from the 
journey planner and automatically compiled to recogniser grammar.  

Positioning makes route planning easier, because the current address can be searched with 
reverse geocoding. Often used target addresses can be saved to a list, but if the start or target 

5 

address is unknown, terminal asks for an address. Voice response is recorded and transferred 
to the server for recognition. Recognition result is then transferred back to the terminal for 
certifying.  All  personal  parameters  like  walking  speed  are  also  transferred  to  the  server. 
When we have all the information needed for route planning, the server generates a route 
request and sends it to the journey planner. 

Route  plan  is  based  on  journey  planner's  response.  It  is  augmented  with  road  work 
information, Point of interest (POI) -information and Area of interest (AOI) -information. 
Road works on the route are gathered from WINKKI-database from Helsinki Public Works 
Department. User listens the route plan and if he/she considers it acceptable, the next step is 
to start route guidance. 

 

Figure 5. Example route planned by Helsinki metropolitan area journey planner [7]. 

3.2  Pedestrian navigation 

In  pedestrian  mode  we  have  to  navigate  using  mostly  the  same  map  data  than  in  car 
navigation.  Map  data  used  in  navigation  systems  today  is  collected  for  car  navigation 
purposes.  The  map  usually  includes  only  street  centre  line,  street  name  and  class,  no 
pavement  information.  Example  of  this  can  be  seen  in  Figure  5,  where  walking  route  is 
marked (on) with blue dashed line. This is not adequate for pedestrians, because pedestrians 
use  pavements,  zebra  crossings  and  footpaths.  Required  accuracy  of  the  maps  would  be 
about 2-5 meters and routing should include pavements, zebra crossings and traffic lights. 
Result information should include coordinates and form points of the route. 

Map quality is an important factor in navigation, because navigation systems can't recognize 
map errors without environment perception sensors. Correct route is more essential for the 
blind persons, because they can't see if the route proposed by the navigator is dangerous or 
unusable.  

Positioning  errors  are  easier,  because  for  example  GPS  receiver  delivers  error  estimate. 
Therefore, although we can't correct the error, we can warn the user of the operation defect. 
Navigation systems must always take into account that the maps are not accurate and have 
errors and positioning accuracy varies sporadically.  

6 

Guidance  methods  change  according  to  possible  inaccuracies  in  positioning.  If  the 
positioning  accuracy  is  1  m,  you  can  give  guidance  to  a  target,  which  is  for  example  10 
meters  away,  but  not  if  the  positioning  accuracy  is  100  m.  Guidance  in  the  case  of  low 
positioning accuracy is telling the big picture of the route and resembles asking for another 
person for guidance. 

3.3  Public transport terminals 

Stations  and  terminals  are  usually  indoor  environments,  where  satellite  positioning  is 
unavailable.  There  are  several  possible  technologies  available  for  indoor  positioning,  but 
none of these methods has the same standard position than GPS has for outdoors. Moreover 
we  must  be  able  to  utilize  the  positioning  with  our  terminal  device.  The  most  promising 
candidates  for  indoor  positioning  are  wireless  LAN  and  Bluetooth  based  systems  [8],  but 
positioning methods are still at early stages and not commonly accepted. Both of them need 
also  infrastructure  investments,  but  these  investments  concern  all  passengers.  Cell  phone 
based positioning is too coarse for navigation purposes. Cell ID based systems give usually 
coordinates that are not inside building's area but the coordinates of closest GSM antenna.  

Besides of no feasible indoor positioning, lack of standardized indoor maps or data models is 
the second barrier for indoor navigation. Often there already exists a suitable guide map of 
the area or building. This is the case with museums, fairgrounds and airports for example. 
These maps need to be modified into navigational form, where it is possible to plan simple 
routes and search location based data. 

For public transport terminals and similar areas we use Area of Interest (AOI) information. 
These are detailed descriptions of target locations. Proximity of the AOI is detected from 
position  coordinates.  In  NOPPA  project,  orientation  and  mobility  specialists  made  speech 
descriptions of two railway stations for the visually impaired. Visually impaired listen the 
description and produce a mental map of the terminal.  

Terminals  have  acoustic  announcement  systems.  Information  is  not  available  for  example 
deaf  persons.  Usually  announcements  are  generated  by  automatic  systems,  where 
information is already in text form. Also this information should be made available through 
suitable  public  interface.  Then  it  would  be  possible  to  serve  for  example  minor  language 
groups as well as disabled persons. 

3.4  Personal announcements 

Personal announcements are possible to produce trough a navigation system in a station and 
in a vehicle. There are cases where for unknown reasons, that acoustic announcement system 
is turned off in a station or in a vehicle. Also there are some user groups that cannot hear or 
understand acoustic announcements at all.  

The main idea of the personal announcements is to pick up only those announcements that 
have meaning for the passenger.  

In a vehicle it is possible to produce personal stop announcements. From the route plan we 
know names, passing times and coordinates of the start and end stops and all stops between 
them.  GPS positioning is usually available in a bus and our tests show that method works 

7 

quite  nicely.  Another  way  to  produce  personal  announcements  is  to  request  the  vehicles 
position from an operator's real time tracking system, if available. 

3.5  Public Transport Real Time Information  

Currently  there  are  several  public  transport  real  time  information  systems  in  use  and  in 
development  in  Finland  [9],  [10].  However,  in  most  cases,  the  information  is  used  only 
inside the operator's system, such as in fleet management or passenger terminal screens. The 
information is typically not available via Internet for other purposes. 

Development of public interfaces, such as XML queries via WWW, for distributing public 
transport  passenger  and  real  time  information  for  third  party  purposes,  is  gaining  more 
importance. Mobile phones with advanced graphics are coming to the market and they could 
be used as mobile real time passenger information displays. 

Recently there have been investments in real time displays on bus and tram stops. In many 
cases, different operators' vehicles use the same stop and preferably all available real time 
information  should  be  displayed  on  the  screen.  However,  the  operators  may  be  unable  to 
share  real  time  information  between  their  systems.  Also  third  party  service  providers  are 
unable  to  combine  real  time  information  from  several  sources.  CEN  TC  278  [11  [4]  has 
standardization  plans  based  on  results  from  TRIDENT  and  TRANSMODEL,  to  solve  the 
issue with interfaces. Standards will be published after a few years. 

Public transport real time information has use in personal navigation: In guidance mode, the 
system would check if there is need to inform the passenger or calculate a new route, for 
example if a bus is several minutes late. Disturbances (trains delayed, traffic jams, accidents) 
might require calculating an alternate route. It is also a common requirement to be able to 
quickly  change  the  goal  or  route  parameters,  or  pause  the  route  guidance  to  stop  by  in  a 
coffee shop for example. To successfully manage public transport routes with short waiting 
times for the user requires accurate timetable information.  

For the visually impaired, real time information might be useful for example when waiting at 
a bus stop: it would be easier to select the correct bus at a busy stop when the arrival time of 
the bus is known accurately, instead of often 5-10 minute error compared to static timetable.  
Real time information would also help to tell when to leave the bus. It would enable personal 
stop  announcements  instead  of  continuous  audio  announcements,  which  are  often  seen  as 
disturbing  by  many  passengers  and  therefore  have  even  been  turned  off.  Possibly  in  the 
future, a personal navigation system could also communicate with the vehicle systems (via 
GPRS or Bluetooth) to "press STOP" when it's time to do so, or when waiting at a bus stop, 
indicate  the  driver  that  a  visually  impaired  person  is  waiting  to  get  on  (GPRS  or  other 
wireless Internet connection). 

A sighted person could set alarms in his mobile phone to tell when it's time to start running 
to the bus stop - he could follow the bus he's always taking to go to work. Or he could sit 
down in a lobby waiting for a train or flight to leave, not having to go check the screens 
every now and then, but receiving an alarm instead when it's time to leave for the gate or 
track. 

The public transport operators would benefit from a real time information interface in the 
web  by  not  having  to  create  separate  interfaces  TV  channels  (teletext)  and  other  media 

8 

requesting  the  timetables  and  updates.  An  operator  could  create  one  channel  actually 
resulting in multi-channel. 

Public  transport  route  planners  could  use  information  from  several  operators  (also  static 
timetables)  to  help  customers  plan  better  routes  and  that  way  improve  the  use  of  public 
transport. 

The  operators  and  society  would  benefit  from  real  time  information  services  by  having  a 
cost-effective choice for building physical infrastructure to improve the accessibility and use 
of  public  transport:  some  of  the  information  needs  expensive  to  fulfill  with  traditional 
methods can be solved with personal navigation systems. 

As  an  example,  there  have  often  been  suggestions  about  equipping  buses  with  radio 
transmitters  to  help  the  visually  impaired  to  know  when  the  bus  is  coming.  The  visually 
impaired would in turn carry a radio receiver. In Prague there is a pilot system in operation. 
However, for example in Finland, where we have about 80 000 visually impaired (most of 
them are over age 65) and 10 000 buses, a similar system would cost at least 10 million euros 
just for the bus transmitters. Investment this large does not seem reasonable for just one user 
group. All beacon based systems generally suffer from same dilemma. Also, as the visually 
impaired have many problems, every problem can't be solved with a separate device. 

Real time information has to be, in view of a user: 

•  Cheap. There is no point paying 2 € for information regarding a 2 € bus trip 
•  Easy  and  fast  to  get.  The  number  and  format  of  SMS  services  are  hard  to 

remember. Usually ease of use requires a personal navigation software 

•  Correct and up-to-date. 

And in view of service providers: 

In standardized or at least constant format 

• 
•  Security  issues  have  to  be  thought  of  (is  the  information  public  or  classified, 

intranet security). 

The  problem  with  real  time  information  interfaces  and  services  is  that  starting  costs  are 
possibly higher than projected income, so the projects probably need governmental support. 
However, real time information would also increase the use of public transport. 

3.5.1  Concept Example: Waiting at a Bus Stop 

In order for a visually impaired person to get on a bus, he has to know the right bus has 
arrived and the relative place of the entrance. Traditionally the visually impaired hold up a 
sign showing bus number indicating they wish to get on the bus. However, it may happen on 
a busy stop that the bus driver has to stop behind other buses, far away from the visually 
impaired person and easily misses him. 

The required data for the task: 

•  Route plan (by a public transport route planner) indicating the line number, estimated 

time of departure, stop number and stop coordinates  

9 

•  Real time data from bus operator ("Bus 23 arrives in 3 minutes", "Bus 23 at stop" 

and/or bus coordinates).  

Bus operator

Real time
system

Public
server

Location

coordinates

Inquiry

Navigation

server

Hervanta
23
on stop
4
16 min
16
2 min

Information

display

"Bus 23 on stop"

User

terminal

Figure 6. Real time information flow. 

 

If real time data includes bus coordinates, it is possible to guide the visually impaired person 
closer to bus entrance in the case that the bus is located far from him. This requires a GPS 
positioning  device.  Positioning  also  indicates  to  the  personal  navigation  software  that  the 
user is standing at the stop (coordinates, speed and heading). After the bus has stopped its 
coordinates are forwarded to the personal navigator to calculate the relative distance. 

From line number and timetable we get the exact bus number to follow. The arrival at the 
stop can be detected from bus coordinates and speed, if exact arrival is not triggered. This 
method requires that the data transfer delays from a bus to a user terminal are not too long. 
An indication of arrival needs to be received in good time before the bus leaves the stop. The 
information flow is presented in figure 2. 

VTT is currently building a test setup to measure delays from bus to the operator's system 
and then to a personal navigator, and positioning inaccuracies.   

The best results can be achieved, when both the vehicle coordinates and arrival time estimate 
are available.  In successful operation the data transfer delays play a big role. If the delays 
don't hinder the system, it's possible to guide a visually impaired close to a vehicle door. At 
least a person can be alarmed when the right vehicle is about to arrive or when it's time to 
leave the vehicle. 

3.5.2  Concept Example: Guidance Inside a Bus 

During a bus trip the personal navigator follows a route plan and gives out stop and street 
names. When the GPS receiver functions well inside the vehicle, the stop announcements 

10 

can  be  generated  from  the  route  plan  and  coordinates  directly.  In  case  the  GPS  is  not 
available,  the  location  and  stop  information  need  to  be  requested  over  GPRS  from  bus 
operator.  

The  navigator  can  calculate  the  time  to  the  target  and  alert  the  user  to  press  STOP  early 
enough (figure 3). 

Bus stop 1

Navigator in:
STREET mode

  STOP mode

 VEHICLE mode

Bus stop 2

"Bus arrived"

"Next stop 3"

Bus stop 3

"Stop 3. Next stop 4"

"Next stop 4. Time to target XX min."

Bus stop 4

"Stop 4. Next stop 5"

Destination

STREET mode

Bus stop 5

"Leave at next stop. (press <stop>)" 

"Stop 5. Leave vehicle"

Bus stop 6

 

Figure 7. Guidance information and navigation modes inside a bus. 

VTT has implemented GPS-based route guidance and personal announcements functionality 
in  NOPPA  personal  navigator.  In  user  tests  the  stop  announcements  from  the  navigation 
software have been found to be quite exact. When the map doesn't have large errors (> 30 
meters) and GPS signal is not close to disappearing, it is possible to tell with an error of 
typically max two seconds, when a moving car or a bus passes a stop. 

Project's real time tests are due to autumn 2004 when Helsinki City Transport's real time 
information interface becomes available in the Internet. 

3.5.3  Concept Example: Trains 

To board a train, at least some information about time, platform, train configuration and seat 
is required. In long distance trains, most of the information reads in the ticket. In commuter 
trains seat and time are not as important. Also some knowledge of the station is required to 
find to the platform.  

Currently in Finland all train timetables are available via Internet, also for 3rd party route 
planning purposes. Real time information is coming into test use this year (2004) by Finnish 

11 

Railroad  Administration.  At  the  first  phase  information  about  the  train's  platform  may 
however not be available via Internet, only from the train station's information display.  

Station maps are available from the largest stations, but as there are no standard for indoor 
maps and models, the plain images are not very usable in navigation applications. Especially 
there is no way to automatically produce information about indoor premises for the visually 
impaired. 

At European level a ERTMS/ETCS (European Rail Traffic Management System / European 
Train  Control  System)  traffic  management  system  is  becoming  into  use.  It  is  expected  to 
provide a basis also for real time information systems and route planning.  

Currently there is no sufficient digital information to guide a visually impaired board a train 
with a navigation system. In principle the logic is as follows: 

The  train's  destination,  time  and/or  id  has  to  be  entered  to  the  navigation  system,  if  an 
intercity  route  is  not  planned,  in  which  case  the  user  would  have  to  enter  only  his  seat 
number. Based on the train and seat numbers the navigation system can search for the train 
configuration and the right car. 

When the train stops, if we get the position of the trains engine (or other GPS origin) from 
real  time  information  system,  it  would  be  possible  to  tell  the  places  of  the  passenger  car 
doors and guide a person close to the right door. The idea is presented in figure 4. 

S95
P100
IC91

on stop
16 min
2 min

Information

display

(lat, lon)
(xj,yj)

Terminal
Information

System

Public
server

Intern

et

Line 
time 
(xj, yj)

Operator

fleet management

Public
server

Line

Configuration
Measurements

Noppa

Information

server 

d2

(x1,y1)

(x2,y2)

d3

d4

(x3,y3)

(x4,y4)

Wireless
connection

GPS

d1

Left 30 m

Left 15 m

Noppa
terminal
(lat, lon, Θ)

(x,y)

Right 15 m

Right 30 m

 

Figure 8. Guiding a passenger to car door. 

At a train station it may not be wise to tell exact distances and directions, as with GPS they 
are always estimates with about 10 meter error, to avoid guiding the user straight to empty 
rails. Rough estimates with e.g. left/right directions should be sufficient. The waiting places 
are usually near rails and the directions could be told according to the direction of rails and 
train. 

At a commuter train the guidance will be to the nearest car with ticket reader. 

12 

Inside  a  train  the  current  GPS  receivers  don't  usually  work,  so  the  information  about  the 
train's location or next stops has to be requested over GPRS. Time based route following is 
also possible when there aren't long delays. Counting stops is also possible, but the train may 
also stop between stations and the stops have to be compared also to timetable. 

3.5.4  Concept Example: Air TRAVEL 

The difference or air travel to other public transport forms are mainly that airports can be 
very large and complicated areas with check-in, boarding and safety controls, operation at 
gates and with baggage. There are also a variety of services available while the passenger is 
waiting for a flight.  

Mobile phone navigation may be useful in requesting information about a certain flight (a 
personal information display) and automatically following the flight's status, receiving only 
the status changes. Personal announcements are also a way to ensure that the user gets the 
information,  when  audio  announcements  may  go  unheard.  The  user  could  get  the 
information of the terminal and gate for example while traveling in a taxi, to tell the driver. 
Or the taxi driver could have such an information system installed which could tell the next 
departuring flights, their terminal and check-in desks. 

In the future, electronic tickets and electronic payment may enable the ticket information to 
be entered directly to the mobile phone and navigation software, so the user doesn't have to 
enter a lot of data. 

Guiding the visually impaired at an airport with navigation software could be done with text 
(synthesized  to  speech)  descriptions  of  the  area.  The  wireless  LAN  networks  which  are 
coming into use in airports could be used to some degree in positioning. Some guidance can 
be given even without positioning. 

After boarding a plane the navigation system and mobile phones have to be turned off.  

4.  Conclusions 

Our prototype fulfils the requirements we set at the beginning of the project. The main goal 
was  to  show  that  a  guidance  system  for  the  visually  impaired  person  is  possible  to  build 
without laborious and expensive changes in the current infrastructure. This is possible with 
utilising  common  Internet  services  for  passenger  information  and  personal  navigation.  It 
seems applicable to at least buses, trains and trams in the same format. With flights the flight 
and gate status can be followed. 

Passenger information systems should be equipped with a standard Internet interface (XML). 
Through  this  interface  it  would  be  possible  to  deliver  static  information  (timetables),  real 
time information and disturbance information in such way that it is accessible to the special 
user groups. These interfaces are needed for example when developing mobile applications 
for  all  passengers.  Utilising  real time information systems, it is possible to guide visually 
impaired persons to right vehicle without costly investments to the beacon systems 

Development of public transport route planners should be focused on pedestrian use, because 
pedestrians use public transport. Required accuracy of the maps would be about 2-5 meters 

13 

and  routing  should  include  pavements,  crosswalks  and  traffic  lights.  Result  information 
should include coordinates and form points of the route.. 

References 
                                                           
[1] 

Interacting  with  Computers. 

Gill,  J.,  Mobility  of  Blind  and  Elderly  People 
http://www.tiresias.org/reports/mobicf.htm. (27.2.2004) 
Garaj,  V.,  "The  Brunel  Navigation  System  for  Blind:  Determination  of  the  Appropriate 
Position to Mount the External GPS Antenna on the User's Body", In Proceedings of the U.S. 
Institute of Navigation - GPS 2001 Technical Meeting, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.  
A. Helal, S. Moore, and B. Ramachandran, "Drishti: An Integrated Navigation System for 
Visually  Impaired  and  Disabled,"  Proceedings  of  the  5th  International  Symposium  on 
Wearable Computer, October 2001, Zurich, Switzerland  
http://www.senderogroup.com (27.2.2004) 
http://www.visuaide.com  (27.2.2004) 
http://www.vtt.fi/tuo/53/projektit/noppa/noppaeng.htm 
http://www.reittiopas.fi (27.6.2204) 
Virtanen  Ari  &  Koskinen  Sami,  Towards  Seamless  Navigation.  In  proceedings  of  the 
MobileVenue'04. 27-28.5.2004 Athens, Greece. 6 p.  

[2] 

[3]  

[4] 
[5]  
[6]  
[7]  
[8] 

[9] 

Sane, K.J., Långström, L. and Nickul, E.. Real-time Passenger Information -A New Way to 
Promote Public Transport. http://www.hel.fi/ksv/entire/repPassengerInformation.htm 
(27.2.2004) 

[10] 

PARAS. Tampereen paikallisliikenteen hallintajärjestelmä. 
http://www.tampere.fi/tkl/paras.html#reaaliaikaista (in Finnish) (27.2.2004) 

[11] 

CEN Technical Committee 278 Web Site. http://www.nen.nl/cen278/ (24.6.2004) 

14 

