B U R G S T A H L E R  

Comments from Peer Reviewers 
 
“ The importance of this paper is its success in conveying the 
role of technology in the education and career success of individuals 
with disabilities.  This article will be an important contribution 
to the field of postsecondary education….  The author constructed 
a fact-filled primer on the importance of technology for the education of individuals 
with disabilities.  She clearly tied this into their future success and employability 
and she focused mainly on technologies used within postsecondary settings.  [Step by 
step], the author walks a novice through (a) the importance of technology access for students 
with disabilities, (b) commonly used terminology, (c) multiple examples of how 
technology improves participation and success in education and careers, (d) the legislative 
underpinnings that support equal access, (e) the challenges and barriers that impede 
access to and full use of technology, and (f) the implications that the current state of affaires 
has for future researchers, policy, and service.  The author uses multiple, current 
and credible sources in constructing the paper and this provides a strong tone to the 
manuscript. Moreover, her use of specific examples helps the reader to understand on a 
personal level what technology access truly means to an individual.” 

CYNDI ROWLAND, PH.D. 
Project Director  
Web Accessibility In Mind (WebAIM) 
Center for Persons with Disabilities 
Utah State University 

This paper was also reviewed by: 
Dennis Small 
Information Technology Services 
Olympia, WA 
 
Mary Brady, Ph.D. 
Assistant Professor  
Center for Social Development and 

Education  

University of Massachusetts, 
Boston 
 
Ron Stewart 
Director, Technology Access Program  
Oregon State University 
Corvallis, Oregon 

Imke Durre 
University of Washington 
 
Terry Thompson 
AccessIT, National Center on  
Accessible Information Technology in 

Education 

University of Washington 
 
Paul Grossman 
Office of Civil Rights 
San Francisco 

 

 
 

 

 

 

B U R G S T A H L E R  

 

 

Table of Contents 

 

 
 
 

Abstract ......................................................................................................................1 
Access to Technology for People with Disabilities...........................................................1 
Terminology .................................................................................................................5 
Roles of Technology for Students with Disabilities ..........................................................7 
Legislation...................................................................................................................9 
Discussion of Barriers and Solutions ............................................................................ 10 
Accommodation vs. Universal Design ................................................................... 10 
 
Funding .............................................................................................................. 11 
 
Selection............................................................................................................ 11 
 
 
Full Participation in Pre-College Academic and Employment Offerings..................... 12 
Peer and Mentor Support ..................................................................................... 12 
 
Anytime, Anywhere Access to Technology ............................................................ 13 
 
Promotion of Self-Advocacy, Independence, and Self-Determination........................ 13 
 
 
Work-Based Learning........................................................................................... 14 
Legislation and Policy ......................................................................................... 14 
 
Awareness ......................................................................................................... 14 
 
Research............................................................................................................ 14 
Implications for Policy and Practice............................................................................. 15 
Research Recommendations ....................................................................................... 17 
Conclusion................................................................................................................. 18 
References................................................................................................................. 19 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 

Individuals with 
disabilities are 
less than half as 
likely as their nondisabled 

counterparts to 
own computers, 
and they are about 
one-quarter as 
likely to use the 
Internet.  

B U R G S T A H L E R  

 
White Paper 

The Role of Technology in Preparing Youth with Disabilities for Postsecondary     
Education and Employment 

Abstract 

A 

ccess to electronic and information technology has the potential to promote 
positive postsecondary academic and career outcomes for students with disabilities.
 However, this potential will not be realized unless stakeholders assure 
that all individuals with disabilities have access to technology that promotes 
positive academic and career outcomes; learn to use technology in ways that contribute to 
positive outcomes; and experience a  seamless transition of availability of technology as 
they move through educational and career environments.  

How the report is organized   
This paper explores the role technology can play in helping students with disabilities 
successfully transition to postsecondary studies and employment. It defines terms; provides 
examples of electronic and information technologies and their applications in 
precollege and postsecondary education and employment; summarizes legal issues that 
apply to technology access for students with disabilities in precollege, postsecondary, 
and  employment  settings;  explores  promising 
practices; and lists topics for future research. Ultimately,
  assuring  that  all  of  the  educational and 
employment  opportunities  that  technology  provides 
are accessible to everyone will strengthen our 
economy and promote equal opportunities in all 
adult life activities. 

(cid:140) Definition of Terms    
(cid:141) Examples of IT and Applications 
(cid:142)  Summary of Legal Issues 
(cid:143) Exploration of Promising Practices 

Access to Technology for People with 
Disabilities 
Today,  technology  has  become  essential  in  almost  every  educational,  employment,
 community, and recreational environment. Access to electronic and information 
technology can help students with a wide range of abilities and disabilities prepare for  

 1 

B U R G S T A H L E R  
 

and succeed in adult life. Specifically, for people with disabilities, such access has the 
potential to maximize independence, productivity and participation in academic programs 
and employment. In addition, for those who have the interest and aptitude, advanced 
technology skills can open doors to high tech career fields that were once unavailable 
to people with disabilities.  

Although the benefits of technology may be even greater for people with disabilities 
than  for  people  without  disabilities  (Anderson-Inman,  Knox-Quinn, & Szymnski, 
1999;  Blackhurst,  Lahm,  Harrision,  &  Chandler,  1999;  DO-IT, 2001; Goldberg & 
O'Neill, 2000; Hasselbring & Glaser, 2000; Success stories, 2002), individuals with disabilities 
are less than half as likely as their non-disabled counterparts to own computers, 
and they are about one-quarter as likely to use the Internet (Kaye, 2000). In addition, 
the design of many Web pages, instructional software programs, productivity tools, 
telecommunications  products,  and  other  electronic  and  information  technologies 
erects  barriers  for  some  individuals  with  disabilities  (Burgstahler,  2002;  Schmetzke, 
2001). For example, Web pages that do not include text alternatives that can be read by 
speech and Braille output systems limit information access by a student who is blind; 
the content of a videotape that does not have captions is inaccessible to a viewer who 
is deaf; and office equipment that cannot be operated from a seated position is inaccessible 
to an employee who uses a wheelchair for mobility. 

Taking advantage of the power that technology offers in improving the precollege and 
postsecondary academic outcomes for individuals with disabilities is critically important 
because people with disabilities today experience far less career success than their nondisabled 
peers (Benz, Doren, & Yovanoff, 1998; Butterworth, 1998; DeLoach, 1992; 
Gilson, 1996; McNeil, 1997, 2000; National Council on Disability, 2000; National Organization 
on Disability, 1998; Phelps & Hanley-Maxwell, 1997; Wagner & Blackorby, 
1996). However, these differences in achievement diminish between individuals as they 
gain more education. For example, the employment rate for individuals with disabilities 
who do not complete high school is 15.6%; for those who complete high school it is 
30.2%; for those with some postsecondary education it is 45.1%; and for those with 
four years of college it is 50.3% (Yelin & Katz, 1994a, 1994b). Clearly, technology access 
that leads to greater success in precollege and postsecondary education has the 
potential to improve career outcomes for people with disabilities.  

Today, individuals with disabilities are significantly underrepresented in postsecondary 
education and a significantly lower percentage of students with disabilities than 
those without disabilities eventually earn degrees (Horn & Berktold, 1999; National 
Council on Disability, 2000). The largest and fastest growing reported disability among 
freshmen who report having disabilities is learning disability – 40.4% in 2000 as compared 
to 16.1% in 1988 (Henderson, 2001). Percentages of students with disabilities 
reporting other types of disabilities are 16.1% blindness or partial sight, 15.4% healthrelated 
impairments, 8.6% hearing impairments, 7.1% orthopedic impairments, 2.9% 
speech  impairments, and 16.9% other impairments (Henderson). Even those who 
complete postsecondary studies are likely to have fewer work-based learning experi2 


B U R G S T A H L E R  
 

ences than those who do not have disabilities. Lack of job skills and related experiences 
before graduation create additional barriers to employment for people with disabilities 
(Benz, Doren, & Yovanoff, 1998; Benz, Yovanoff, & Doren, 1997; Blackorby & Wagner,
 1996; Luecking & Fabian, 2000; National Council on Disability, 2000; National 
Council  on  Disability  and  Social  Security  Administration,  2000;  Phelps  &  HanleyMaxwell,
 1997; Unger, Wehman, Yasuda, Campbell, & Green, 2001). The poor employment 
figures for people with disabilities coupled with the positive impact of postsecondary 
education and work-related experiences makes increasing their success in 
these activities an important goal. The cost of failure to reach this goal, to these individuals 
 and  to  society,  is  high  (Blackorby  &  Wagner,  1996;  Gajar,  1998;  Reskin & 
Roos, 1990; Stodden, 1998; Stodden & Dowrick, 2000; Wagner & Blackorby, 1996; 
Yelin & Katz, 1994a, 1994b).  

High tech careers are particularly accessible to individuals with disabilities because of 
the combined effect of the increasing use of electronic and information technology and 
of  the  advancements  in  assistive  technology  that  provide  access  to  computers  and 
other electronic equipment for people with a variety of disabilities (Closing the Gap, 
2001; Smith & Jones, 1999). A bachelor’s degree or higher is a prerequisite for many of 
these challenging careers (Price-Ellingstad  &  Berry,  1999/2000).  Although  few  students 
with disabilities pursue high tech postsecondary programs and careers and the 
attrition rate is high (Malcom & Matyas, 1991; National Science Foundation, 2000; Office 
of Disability Employment Policy, 2001), those who succeed in these fields demonstrate 
 that  opportunities  do  exist  for  people  with  disabilities  who  have  successfully 
overcome  the  barriers  imposed  by  facilities,  electronic  and information technology, 
inadequate  academic  preparation,  lack  of  role  models,  and  negative  attitudes  (Blumenkopf,
  Stern,  Swanson,  &  Wohler,  1996;  Burgstahler,  1993-2001,  2001;  DO-IT, 
2001;  Heidare,  1996;  National  Science  Foundation,  1989;  Presidential  Task Force, 
1999; Stern & Summers, 1995; Stevens, Steele, Jutai, Kalnins, Bortolussi, & Biggar, 
1996; Stodden, 1998).  

In order for students with disabilities to pursue postsecondary academic and career 
options, they must have access to the high tech tools available to their nondisabled 
peers. These include computers, Web sites, telecommunications products, instructional 
software, and scientific equipment. Full access requires that built-in barriers to these 
tools and resources as well as facilities in which they are housed be removed and appropriate 
assistive technology be readily available (National Center for Education Statistics,
 2000a, 2000b; Schmetzke, 2001; Waddell, 1999).  

Today, the full potential of using technology to prepare young people with disabilities 
for postsecondary education is not being realized (National Council on Disability & 
Social Security Administration, 2000). Funding is reported as the top barrier by providers 
and policy experts (National Council on Disability, 2000). Consumers identify the 
two biggest barriers to be lack of knowledge of stakeholders about appropriate assistive 
technology and lack of funding to purchase assistive technology (Fichten, Barile, & 
Asuncion, 1999; National Council on Disability). Many graduates of teacher education 

 3 

B U R G S T A H L E R  
 

programs are not adequately prepared in the general use of computer technology and 
in classroom applications (Anderson & Pelch-Hogan, 2001; Hasselbring & Glasser, 
2000;  National  Center  for  Education  Statistics,  2000a,  2000b;  National  Council  on 
Disability). In addition, as reported by the National Council on Disability (p. 25), "the 
rapid acquisition of educational technology has not sufficiently addressed the needs of 
students with disabilities. Access for students with disabilities is just beginning to be 
identified as an important factor when purchasing educational technology.” Consequently,
  products  with  inaccessible  characteristics  are  often  purchased,  inaccessible 
electronic resources and educational software is developed and purchased, and inaccessible 
facilities are constructed. Many computer support staff, regular education teachers,
 and special education teachers are not sufficiently trained to use mainstream and 
specialized equipment and on how these technologies can work together to maximize 
access to education for students with disabilities. As summarized by Hasselbring and 
Glasser (p. 118), "Lack of adequate teacher training has an especially strong impact on 
students with disabilities because technology is often a critical component in planning 
and implementing an educational program for these students."  

Other  barriers  to  technology  access  for  individuals  with  disabilities  include  lack  of 
trained professionals to evaluate assistive technology, difficulties in locating assistive 
technology to test by individuals with disabilities, confusion about existing laws and 
policies regarding assistive technology and accessible electronic and information technology,
 gaps in laws and policies that fund assistive technology, and the bureaucracy of 
public programs and insurance companies (National Council on Disability). In particular,
 because of differences in laws and funding for technology between precollege and 
college environments, even students who are lucky enough to gain access to empowering 
technology in precollege settings, may not be allowed to take it with them when 
they exit high school. 

Clearly, much work needs to be done before the full potential of today's technology to 
promote postsecondary academic and career success for students with disabilities is 
realized. However, it is easier to agree on the problems that exist than the interventions 
that will overcome them. Most would agree, however that the situation would be much 
improved if the following three conditions were assured. 

•  All individuals with disabilities have  access to technology that promotes positive 

academic and career outcomes.  

•  People with disabilities learn to use technology in ways that contribute to positive 

postsecondary academic and career outcomes and self-determined lives. 

•  There is a seamless transition of availability of technology for all people with disabilities 
as they move from K-12 to postsecondary to career environments. 

 

Next, this paper defines terminology related to the use of technology by people with 
disabilities.  Then,  it  describes  what  specific  roles  technology  can  play  in  preparing 
young  people  with  disabilities  for  postsecondary  education  and  employment.  Next, 

 4 

B U R G S T A H L E R  
 

legal issues in precollege education, postsecondary academic, and employment settings 
are discussed. After that, some of the issues that must be addressed in order for young 
people with disabilities to gain the full benefits that technology has to offer as they 
transition from precollege education to postsecondary education and employment are 
summarized. Finally, implications and recommendations are suggested. 
Terminology 
Throughout this paper, “technology” includes electronic and information technology 
and assistive technology that provides access to electronic and information technology. 
“Information technology” is defined as “any equipment or interconnected system or 
subsystem of equipment, that is used in the automatic acquisition, storage, manipulation,
 management, movement, control, display, switching, interchange, transmission, or 
reception of data or information. The term 'information technology' includes computers,
 ancillary equipment, software, firmware and similar procedures, services (including 
support services), and related resources.” (Office of the Federal Register 2000, 
p. 80499) “Electronic technology” encompasses information technology, but also includes 
any equipment or interconnected system or subsystem of equipment, that is 
used  in  the  creation,  conversion,  or  duplication  of  data  or  information.  Electronic 
technology  includes  telecommunications  products  such  as  telephones  and  office 
equipment such as copiers and fax machines.  

Many electronic and information technology products are designed in such a way that 
they are inaccessible to people with some types of disabilities. For example, a person 
with a visual impairment may not be able to interpret instructions if they are presented 
only in a visual format; a person who is deaf cannot access content if it is only presented 
aurally. An important term to define is “access,” as it relates to the use of computer 
hardware, software, and other technology. According to the National Science 
Foundation, “access implies the ability to find, manipulate and use information in an 
efficient and comprehensive manner” (Lesk, 1998). Too often even those individuals 
with disabilities who have a computer and Internet connection, still cannot make full 
use of its capabilities because of the inaccessible features of hardware and/or software 
(Waddell, 1999). They have technology, but do not have access to all of the benefits it 
delivers to others.  

“Assistive  technology”  is  defined  as  “any  item,  piece  of  equipment,  or  system, 
whether acquired commercially, modified, or customized, that is commonly used to 
increase, maintain, or improve functional capabilities of individuals with disabilities.” 
(Technology-Related Assistance, 1988). Assistive technology enables people with disabilities 
to accomplish daily living tasks; assists them in communication; and provides 
greater access to education, employment, and recreation. It can be used to maximize 
physical or mental functioning and minimize the impact of a disability. Examples of 
assistive technology include scooters and wheelchairs, alternative automobile controls, 
environmental  controls,  prostheses,  communication aids, hand splints, hearing aids, 
and alternative input and output devices for computers. An "assistive technology ser5 


B U R G S T A H L E R  
 

vice" is defined as "any service that directly assists an individual with a disability in selection,
 acquisition or use of an assistive technology device" (Technology-Related As-
sistance). For this paper, only assistive technology that interfaces with electronic and 
information technology and related services are relevant.  

The process of creating products that are accessible to people with a wide range 
of abilities, disabilities, and other characteristics is called “universal design.” Universal 
design is defined by the National Center for Universal Design at North Carolina State 
University as “the design of products and environments to be usable by all people, to 
the greatest extent possible, without the need for adaptation or specialized design.” 
(What is universal design?, 2002) At this Center, a team of architects, product designers, 
engineers, and environmental design researchers established a set of principles of universal 
design to provide guidance in the design of environments, communications, and 
products. General principles include: the design accommodates a wide range of individual 
preferences and abilities; the design communicates necessary information effectively,
 regardless of ambient conditions or the user’s sensory abilities; the design can be 
used efficiently and comfortably, and with a minimum of fatigue; and appropriate size 
and space is provided for approach, reach, manipulation, and use regardless of the user’ 
s body size, posture, or mobility. The concept of universal design has been applied to 
all teaching and learning activities (Bar & Galluzzo, 1999; Bowe, 2000; Universal design 
for learning, 2002). In particular, when producers apply universal design principles as 
they create electronic and information technology, the products are more usable by 
everyone, including people with disabilities. They minimize the need for assistive technology 
and are compatible with commonly used assistive hardware and software. Below 
are a few examples of accessible electronic and information technology and its 
benefits to students with disabilities in educational settings. 

•  Accessible Web pages allow students with disabilities, including those who 
have sensory impairments, to access information; share their work; communicate 
with peers, teachers, and mentors; and take advantage of distance 
learning options. 

•  Accessible instructional software (on disks, CDs or other media) and 
documentation allow students with disabilities to participate side-byside 
with their peers in computer labs and classrooms as they complete 
assignments;  collaborate  with  peers;  create  and  view  presentations, 
documents,  spreadsheets;  and  actively  participate  in  simulations and 
other computer-based activities. 

•  Accessible  telephones  make  communication  accessible  to  everyone, 

including those with mobility, visual and hearing impairments. 

 

The following section provides examples of roles technology can play in the lives of 
individuals with disabilities. 

 6 

B U R G S T A H L E R  
 

Roles of Technology For Students With 
Disabilities 
The following examples demonstrate how electronic and information technology can 
be used by students with disabilities and contribute to their independence, productivity, 
and participation in academics and careers. Specifically, technology can help them: 

•  Maximize independence in academic and employment tasks. Ex-
ample: A student with a mobility impairment uses a hands-free keyboard and 
mouse to operate a computer to take class notes, access library resources, and 
complete papers rather than have an assistant write for her.  

 
•  Participate in classroom discussions. Example: A student who cannot 
speak uses a computer-based communication device to deliver speeches and 
participate in class discussions. 

•  Gain access to peers, mentors, and role models. Example: In a supported 
Internet community, a student who is deaf uses electronic mail to chat 
with other teens, gain support for college and career transition from mentors, 
and meet role models. (Burgstahler, 1997; Burgstahler & Cronheim, 2001) 

•  Self-advocate.  Example: A student who is deaf uses a TTY and relay service 
to arrange appointments regarding internship accommodations with her 
supervisor. 

•  Gain  access  to  the  full  range  of  educational  options. Example: A 
student who is blind and uses speech output technology fully participates in an 
Internet-based distance learning course that employs universal design principles 
to assure access to people with disabilities.  

•  Participate in experiences not otherwise possible.  Example: a young 
man with no functional use of his arms and legs experiences completing a 
chemistry experiment through a computer simulation and observing sea life 
while swimming in the ocean through virtual reality.  

•  Succeed  in  work-based  learning  experiences.   Example: A student 
who has no use of his hands independently operates a computer to draft and 
edit articles in a journalism internship at the local newspaper office. 

•  Secure high levels of independent living.  Example: A young person 
who has a developmental disability uses a cell phone to maintain regular contact 
with care givers as he participates in community activities. Example: A 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 7 

B U R G S T A H L E R  
 

 

 

 

 

 

teen with a mobility impairment uses a voice-controlled system to operate the 
television, turn lights on and off, open doors, and perform other tasks of daily 
life. 

•  Prepare for transitions to college and careers.  Example: A student 
with a learning disability that makes it difficult for him to read uses a computer 
with a speech output system to explore internship and career opportunities, 
take self-paced career readiness and interest tests, and research the academic 
programs and services for students with disabilities offered at colleges of interest.
 

•  Work side-by-side with peers.  Example: A girl who is blind and a boy 
who has no use of his hands work on the school newsletter with fellow journalism 
students; she uses speech output technology, he uses a voice recognition 
system, and other students use standard input and output devices on a local 
area network in the computer lab. 

•  Master  academic  tasks  that  they  cannot  accomplish  otherwise. 
Example: A student with a learning disability uses a set of software tools to 
support her management of reading, writing and study demands in a postsecondary 
setting (Anderson-Inman, Knox-Quinn, & Szymanski, 1999). 

•  Enter high tech career fields.  Example: A child who shows interest in 
engineering at a young age, but does not have the fine motor skills to manipulate 
objects, gains technical knowledge using the Internet, operates computer 
simulations of engineering tasks, and develops a solid foundation for college 
studies and a career in engineering. 

•  Participate in community and recreational activities.  Example: An 
adult who is blind can privately cast his vote for President of the United States 
because the voting booth is designed to be accessible to everyone. 

 

These and countless other examples demonstrate the important roles electronic and 
information technology can play as young people with disabilities pursue postsecondary 
education and careers. First, they realize the same benefits as individuals without 
disabilities – they write articles, develop spreadsheets, access Internet-based resources 
and services, work side-by-side with their peers. In addition to these benefits, however, 
some people with disabilities use technology as compensatory tools which allow them 
to do things that are otherwise impossible because of their disabilities. For example, 
technology can provide a voice for those who cannot speak in the customary way; can 
allow people to “write” even though they do not have functional use of their hands; 
can make it possible for individuals to use the telephone even though they do not have 
the ability to hear.  

 8 

Although 
educational 
institutions and 
employers have 
legal obligations to 
provide technology 
access to students 
and employees 
with disabilities, 
barriers still 
prevent people 
with disabilities 
from gaining full 
access to 
technologies that 
can help them 
reach their full 
potential. 
 

B U R G S T A H L E R  
 

The following section summarizes key legislation related to technology access for people 
with disabilities in elementary and secondary schools, postsecondary institutions, 
and employment. 
Legislation 
The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (1997, formerly called P.L. 94-142 or 
the Education for all Handicapped Children Act of 1975) mandates that each state 
provide a free and appropriate education for all children, regardless of their abilities or 
disabilities. It requires that Individual Education Plans (IEPs) be developed for students 
with disabilities who meet certain criteria and that assistive technology and transition,
 among other things, be considered in the development of IEPs. 

Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 prohibits discrimination against individuals 
with disabilities in programs and services that receive federal funds, which include 
the vast majority of educational institutions. The Americans with Disabilities Act of 
1990 (ADA) reinforces and extends the requirements of Section 504 to public programs 
and services, regardless of whether or not they receive federal funds. Precollege 
programs must provide access to all children, regardless of disabilities; thus, all students 
with disabilities, regardless of whether they have IEPs, have a right to the same technology 
access that is provided to students without disabilities. For qualified students 
who disclose their disabilities and present appropriate documentation, postsecondary 
institutions must provide reasonable accommodations to assure equal access to program 
offerings (Frank & Wade, 1993; McCusker, 1995; West, Kregel, Getzel, Zhu, Ipsen,
 & Martin, 1993). Although the ADA does not specifically mention electronic and 
information  technology,  the  United  States  Department  of  Justice  clarified  that  the 
ADA applies to Internet-based resources – “Covered entities that use the Internet for 
communications regarding their programs, goods, or services must be prepared to offer 
those communications through accessible means as well” (Patrick, 1996). The ADA 
mandates nondiscrimination in employment as well, requiring reasonable accommodations 
for employees with disabilities; such accommodations may include the purchase 
of assistive technology.  

Provisions of the Carl D. Perkins Vocational and Applied Technology Education Act 
of 1990, the Rehabilitation Amendments of 1992, the School-to-Work Opportunities 
Act of 1994, and the Technology-Related Assistance for Individuals with Disabilities 
Act of 1998 further dictate program access and support services that must be provided 
to people with disabilities (Fisher & Gardner, 1999). Unfortunately, many elementary, 
secondary, and postsecondary educators and service providers have difficulty understanding 
and applying the maze of conflicting definitions, eligibility criteria, and policy 
implications of legislation that impacts the provision of technology access for individuals 
with disabilities (National Council on Disability, 2000). 

 9 

B U R G S T A H L E R  
 

Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act requires that agencies of the Federal government 
develop, purchase and use electronic and information technology that is accessible 
to individuals with disabilities. The Architectural and Transportation Barriers 
Compliance Board (Access Board) developed standards to which these agencies must 
comply (Office of the Federal Register,  2000). Even for those who are not covered 
entities under Section 508, the standards developed by the Access Board provide a 
good starting point for organizations seeking to meet their ADA obligations. They include 
standards for accessible desktop and portable computers; Web-based resources; 
video and multimedia products; software and operating systems; and self-contained, 
closed systems such as photocopiers and fax machines. 

Although  educational  institutions  and  employers  have  legal  obligations  to  provide 
technology  access  to  students  and  employees  with  disabilities, barriers still prevent 
people with disabilities from gaining full access to technologies that can help them 
reach their full potential. These challenges are discussed in the next section of this paper.
 
Discussion of Barriers and Solutions 
Technology has the potential to improve the educational, career, and adult living outcomes 
for people with disabilities. However, this potential will not be realized unless 
barriers to reaching the following goals are overcome. 

1.  All individuals with disabilities have access to technology that promotes positive 

academic and career outcomes.  

2.  People with disabilities learn to use technology in ways that contribute to positive 

postsecondary academic and career outcomes and self-determined lives. 

3.  There is a seamless transition of availability of technology for all people with disabilities 
as they move from K-12 to postsecondary to career environments. 

Questions that must be answered in order to reach these goals are discussed below. 
The specific goals addressed in each discussion section are indicated in parentheses 
immediately after each question. 

A C C O M M O D A T I O N S   V S .   U N I V E R S A L   D E S I G N  

How can the creation of universal design of electronic and information technology 
be promoted? [1] Designing inclusive environments that are accessible to everyone,
 with and without disabilities, minimizes the need for individual accommodations. 
Employing the universal design approach to the development of technology devices, 
facilities, information resources, and services is a critical step towards ensuring that students 
with disabilities are provided with full access to programs and activities in the 
school, workplace, and community. Promoting the use of electronic and information 

 10

Technology 
choices for people 
with disabilities 
should be driven 
by both short-term 
and long-term 
needs. 

 

B U R G S T A H L E R  
 

technology standards established by the Federal government can help educational and 
employment entities move closer to this goal (National Council on Disability, 2000). 
Librarians, educators and others who purchase technology products for schools need 
to demand that accessibility considerations be included in the procurement process. 
Similarly, distance learning program providers must employ universal design principles 
to make courses accessible to potential students with a wide variety of abilities and disabilities,
 including those who are blind and use  speech or Braille output systems. A 
universal design approach to electronic and information technology selection and use 
in schools can help to reduce technology costs as well as facilitate the transfer of technology 
 from  secondary  to  postsecondary  educational  settings;  promote  crossapplication 
and compatibility in education and workplace settings; reduce stigma, cultural 
and attitudinal barriers for students with disabilities; and make it easier to respond 
to changing technology needs of students. 

F U N D I N G  

Who will assure funding so that children with disabilities can gain access to empowering 
technology? [1] Funding is often cited as a barrier to technology access for 
people with disabilities (e.g., National Council on Disability, 2000). Although the cost 
of technology is often lower than anticipated and funding is sometimes suggested as a 
constraint when issues of selection and management are actually more challenging, 
technology does cost money and must be paid for in some way. This issue is likely to 
grow increasingly important as elementary and secondary educators continue to be 
faced with implementing the assistive technology requirements of IDEA, as technology 
in general becomes more widely available as a tool for student learning, and as 
awareness of assistive technology becomes more widespread. Besides consideration of 
the overall costs, deciding who (school, government agency, insurance, family) should 
pay for technology under specific circumstances and who owns the technology  as a 
person transitions between various levels of education and employment create additional 
challenges to be overcome (National Council on Disability).  

Technology choices for people with disabilities should be driven by both short-term 
and long-term needs. Besides initial purchase, questions about who is responsible for 
upgrades and technical support during all life stages must be answered. Funding is 
needed for training personnel to deliver technology services at various academic and 
employment levels and during transition periods, as well as for increasing technology 
awareness among all key stakeholders, including parents, educators, librarians, service 
providers, employers, and people with disabilities. 

S E L E C T I O N  

Who will select appropriate technology and provide ongoing support for students 
with disabilities at various levels in the educational and career preparation proc-
ess? [1, 2] The planning and implementation of effective technology for students with 
disabilities requires specialized knowledge and skills regarding legislation, policies, and 
technology applications and products by those in decision-making and support posi11


B U R G S T A H L E R  
 

tions.  These  individuals  include  special  education  teachers,  occupational  therapists, 
community service providers, students with disabilities, families, and technology professionals 
(Blackhurst, Lahm, Harrision, & Chandler, 1999; National Council on Disability,
 2000). Increasing the knowledge and skills of these individuals regarding the 
availability and potential uses of technology is a critical step towards ensuring that students 
are provided with the tools and supports that will increase readiness and motivation 
as they transition to postsecondary education and employment. Service providers 
need to have the capacity to keep pace with the rapidly changing technology that can 
benefit students with disabilities. With the growing complexity of computing environments 
 and  number  of  commercially  available  assistive  technology  devices,  staff  at 
smaller institutions face special challenges in acquiring and maintaining current information 
about technology options and the most appropriate applications for students 
with disabilities.  

F U L L   P A R T I C I P A T I O N   I N   P R E C O L L E G E   A C A D E M I C   A N D   E M P L O Y -
M E N T   O F F E R I N G S  

How can educators, career services staff, and employers be better trained to understand 
the capabilities and accommodation needs of students with disabilities 
and use technology to help people with disabilities fully participate in academic 
and employment offerings? [2] Sometimes technology is used in a very limited way to 
enhance the education of students with disabilities. For example, a computer might be 
available to a student in a computer lab, but not used by the student for test-taking because 
an individual teacher is not aware that the student can use this technology or because 
they are not sensitive to the need for students with disabilities to complete their 
work independently as they prepare for postsecondary studies and careers. Similarly, 
assistive technology is not always readily available  to a student who might, with this 
technology, be able to participate in work-based learning experiences, such as a summer 
internship. This problem, in part, can be addressed with increased funding for assistive 
technology; greater awareness of the availability and potential uses of assistive 
technology on the part of stakeholders, including educators, career services staff, parents,
 and employers; and effective coordination between these individuals (National 
Council on Disability, 2000; National Council on Disability and Social Security Administration,
 2000). 

P E E R   A N D   M E N T O R   S U P P O R T 

How can students with disabilities employ technology to gain access to meaningful 
peer and mentoring relationships on the Internet? [2] Potential role models who 
have disabilities and are experiencing success in college and careers are often separated 
from potential protégés by great distances and both potential mentors and protégés 
face more complex transportation challenges than individuals without disabilities. Peer 
and mentor support can be provided via moderated discussion groups on the Internet 
(Burgstahler & Cronheim, 2001). Supportive electronic communities can contribute to 
the self sufficiency of people with disabilities. Such activities, however, incur administrative 
time and costs.  

 12

B U R G S T A H L E R  
 

A N Y T I M E ,   A N Y W H E R E   A C C E S S   T O   T E C H N O L O G Y  

How  can  educators  and  employers  assure  that  appropriate  technology  is  available 
when and where people with disabilities need it? [1,3 ] Sometimes accessible 
technology is available to a student with a disability in a special education resource center 
or other isolated location, when it is most needed in the classroom and at home. 
Often technology available to students at the secondary school level does not transition 
with  them  as  they  pursue  postsecondary education and employment. Funding and 
management  strategies  should  be  flexible  enough  to  provide maximum benefit of 
technology access for each individual student. Coordinated education and community 
service systems are essential in ensuring that transfer of technology is a seamless process.
 This can be facilitated by the development of interagency and/or cost sharing 
agreements that identify specific roles and responsibilities of agencies to address the 
technology needs of both students with disabilities who have IEPs and those who do 
not. 

P R O M O T I O N   O F   S E L F - A D V O C A C Y ,   I N D E P E N D E N C E ,   A N D   S E L F -
D E T E R M I N A T I O N  

How can parents, educators and service providers encourage students with disabilities 
 to  use  technology  to  self-advocate, perform daily tasks independently, 
and move toward self-determined lives? [2, 3] Successful transition is integral to a 
student's realization of postsecondary education, employment, and adult living objectives.
 Like all other aspects of the transition process, the role of technology should be 
addressed in a way that maximizes the involvement of the student. Student transition 
plans should include self-advocacy objectives in the technology area so that students 
are able to articulate their technology needs to others (e.g., teachers, professors, em-
ployers) and access training and support throughout their lives (Blackhurst, Lahm, 
Harrison, & Chandler, 1999). Ideally, by high school graduation, students with disabilities 
are experts on the types of technology that serve them best, the technical support 
requirements of their systems, and resources available to them. 

W O R K - B A S E D   L E A R N I N G  

How can students with disabilities gain access to high tech work-based learning 
experiences to prepare them for the world of work? [2,3] Internships, job shadows, 
service learning, and other work-based learning experiences can help students with disabilities 
gain job skills, explore accommodation options, and learn to use technology in 
work  settings  (Benz,  Doren,  &  Yovanoff,  1998;  Benz,  Yovanoff, & Doren, 1997; 
Burgstahler,  2001;  Luecking  &  Fabian,  2000).  Such  experiences can improve their 
chances for a successful school-to-work transition. Individuals who coordinate work 
experiences for high school and college students as well as participating employers 
need greater awareness of the potential contributions and accommodation needs, including 
 assistive  technology,  of  students  with  disabilities.  Stakeholders should work 
together to assure that students have access to appropriate technology for employment 
settings and that students are included in the process in such a way that they gain the 

 13

B U R G S T A H L E R  
 

knowledge and self-advocacy skills they need for success in postsecondary education 
and careers. 

L E G I S L A T I O N   A N D   P O L I CY  

How can the maze of confusing and conflicting laws, rulings, and policy be simpli-
fied? [3] Policy makers and advocates should explore ways to clarify existing legislation 
and use consistent terminology and standards. Dissemination of current laws, policies 
and resources should be tailored to the needs of various stakeholders and disseminated 
widely. Differences that occur as students transition between academic levels and academic 
and career environments should be clearly addressed. Policy makers and advocates 
should also identify and correct inconsistencies and gaps in legislation and policies 
 regarding  the  selection,  funding,  and  support  of  assistive  technology  (National 
Council on Disability, 2000).  
A W A R E N E S S   

How can we assure that key stakeholders have general knowledge of how technology 
can benefit individuals with disabilities?  [1, 2, 3] To be assured that good 
decisions are made by IEP teams and other decision-makers, all stakeholder groups 
need to be aware of the types of technology options available to enhance the academic 
and career outcomes for individuals with disabilities (Blackhurst, Lahm, Harrision, & 
Chandler, 1999; National Council on Disability, 2000). These groups include general 
and special education teachers, occupational therapists, rehabilitation counselors, policymakers,
 paraprofessionals, pre-service and in-service trainers, employers, interagency 
and community service providers, students, families, technology professionals, postsecondary 
disabled student services staff, and medical equipment providers. Individuals 
within these groups represent key stakeholders in the process of ensuring that students 
are provided with appropriate technology and support services as they pursue education 
and careers (Blackhurst, Lahm, Harrision, & Chandler). If stakeholders are not 
aware of how technology can support students with disabilities, these students will not 
have assistive technology adequately considered in the IEP process; they will not have 
access to the full school curriculum; they will not be provided with developmentally 
appropriate devices and services; they will fail to use technology effectively; and they 
will not become prepared to self-advocate regarding their technology needs in future 
stages of their lives. Because of the large number of students with learning disabilities, 
stakeholder knowledge of how technology can promote the success of this group in 
educational and employment settings is especially important. 
R E S E A R C H   

How can we promote research that will improve our understanding of issues related 
 to  technology  access  for  people  with  disabilities  and  its  impact  on  postschool 
outcomes? [1, 2, 3] Mainstream electronic and information technology as well 
as assistive technology is in a constant state of rapid development. We cannot assume 
that what was impossible yesterday for people with disabilities is not possible today. 

 14

Students with 
disabilities should 
be taught to use 
technology in 
ways that 
maximize their 
independence, 
productivity, and 
participation in all 
academic and 
employment 
activities. 

B U R G S T A H L E R  
 

The National Science Foundation, the Department of Defense, the U.S. Department 
of Education and other national and private funding agencies should be encouraged to 
support basic research and promising practices that employ technology to improve the 
postsecondary education and career outcomes for individuals with disabilities. 

The current conditions, legal issues, potential applications, and challenges regarding the 
use of technology by individuals with disabilities discussed in this paper thus far lead to 
the implications for practice listed in the next section. 
Implications for Policy and Practice 
Federal legislation, demands by people with disabilities and their advocates that they be 
included in all life experiences, increased acceptance of diversity, improved medical 
care, and advancements in electronic and information technologies have contributed to 
higher expectations and improved preparation of students with disabilities for postsecondary 
academic programs and careers. As a result, young people with disabilities are 
better prepared to pursue higher education and ever-increasing numbers of students 
with disabilities are attending postsecondary academic institutions. Technology has an 
important role to play in promoting the success of people with disabilities in employment 
and careers. However, legal mandates for computer access for students and employees 
with disabilities are not always reflected in practice, even within organizations 
that have developed access policies. Stakeholders are not fully aware of technology options,
 legal issues, and advocacy strategies. These stakeholders include people with disabilities,
 parents and mentors, government entities, paraprofessionals, policy makers 
and administrators, precollege and postsecondary educators, librarians, technical support 
staff, and employers. These individuals must diligently work together if the following 
goals are to be reached. 

1.  All individuals with disabilities have  access to technology that promotes positive 

academic and career outcomes.  

2.  People with disabilities learn to use technology in ways that contribute to positive 

postsecondary academic and career outcomes and self-determined lives. 

3.  There is a seamless transition of availability of technology for all people with disabilities 
as they move from K-12 to postsecondary to career environments. 

Promising practices to be considered in order to reach these goals include those that 
follow. Most recommendations support multiple goals, as indicated by the numbers in 
parentheses. 

 

 15

B U R G S T A H L E R  
 

 

 

•  Administrators and policymakers should establish policies, standards, and procedures 
at all academic and employment levels to assure that accessibility is 
considered when electronic and information technology is procured. [1] 

 
•  Administrators and policymakers should establish policies, standards, and procedures 
and provide training and support at all educational levels to assure that 
Web pages, library resources, computing and science labs, and distance learning 
programs are accessible to everyone, including students with disabilities. [1, 
2] 

•  Policymakers and administrators should assure that funding is available to purchase 
appropriate assistive technology at all levels of academic programs, in 
employment settings, and during transition periods between these stages. [1, 3] 

•  Agencies should collaborate on planning, funding, selecting, and supporting 
assistive technology to assure continuous technology access and support as 
students with disabilities transition through academic levels and to employment.
 [1, 2, 3] 

 
•  Educators, librarians, parents, support staff, computer lab managers, and other 
stakeholders should have access to training so that they will be able to design 
accessible facilities and activities;  select accessible computers and software; 
purchase appropriate assistive technology; and assure that students with disabilities 
use technology for their maximum benefit as they pursue academics, 
careers, and self-determined lives. [1, 2, 3] 

 
•  Legislators and policy makers should take steps to clarify existing legislation; 
disseminate information about current laws, policies, and resources tailored to 
the needs of various stakeholders; and use consistent terminology and standards.
 They should identify and correct inconsistencies and gaps in legislation 
and policies regarding the selection, funding, and support of assistive technology,
 especially as individuals transition between all academic and employment 
levels. [1, 2, 3] 

 
•  Students with disabilities should be included at all stages of technology selection,
 support, and use so that they learn to self-advocate regarding their needs 
for accessible technology in the classroom and workplace. [1, 2, 3]  

 
•  Students with disabilities should be taught to use technology in ways that 1) 
maximize their independence, productivity, and  participation in all academic 
and employment activities; 2) facilitate successful transitions between all academic 
and employment levels, and 3) lead to successful, self-determined adult 
lives. Technology should be used to support mentoring relationships; access to 
electronic information; participation in science labs; communication in class 

 16

B U R G S T A H L E R  
 

 

discussions; self-advocacy practice; independent living tasks; work-based learning 
opportunities; and other academic and career preparation activities. 

•  Students with disabilities at high school and college levels should participate in 
internships and other work-based learning experiences where they can practice 
using technology in work settings. [1, 2, 3] 

 
Besides taking immediate steps to assure that technology is accessible and appropriately 
used by individuals with disabilities, there is a need for ongoing research to inform future 
practice. Recommendations for research areas to be addressed are included in the 
next section. 
Research Recommendations 
Further research is needed to identify best practices that assure that all individuals with 
disabilities 1) have access to technology that promotes positive academic and career outcomes;
 2) learn to use technology in ways that contribute to positive outcomes; and 3) experience 
a seamless transition of availability of technology as they move through educational 
and career environments. It is recommended that future research explore the 
following issues (National Center for the Study of Postsecondary Educational Supports,
 2001). The goals addressed by each suggestion are included in parentheses. 

•  Research is needed to study the extent to which the application of universal 
design principles reduces the need to provide students with special technologyrelated 
accommodations in precollege and postsecondary settings. [1] 

•  Studies should be undertaken to explore the relationship between degree of 
choice and degree of prescription or availability and effective use of technology 
for people with disabilities (i.e., the value of self-selection, self-determination as 
applied to technology). [1, 2] 

•  Longitudinal studies are needed to document the long range effectiveness of 
technology in helping students gain access to the general education curriculum 
and careers. Some research should focus on the value of early technology access 
and training for children with disabilities. Research is also needed to explore 
how technology can increase the success of students with learning disabilities.
 [2] 

 
•  Studies should explore the value of on-line peer and mentor support in increasing 
the academic and career success and the self-determination skills of 
individuals with disabilities. [2] 

•  There is a need to study state policies regarding how general technology funding 
initiatives address the needs of students with disabilities; how state policy 
impacts funding and decision-making at the local level; and the extent to which 

 17

B U R G S T A H L E R  
 

it includes shared funding through interagency agreements and integration of 
service systems. [1, 3] 

•  Research is needed to explore the progression and cross-application of technology 
through stages from elementary to middle school and secondary education 
and how technology can best be integrated into instruction and transition 
planning to achieve positive postsecondary school and employment outcomes. 
[3] 

•  Exemplary practices need to be identified that increase collaboration among 
stakeholders to provide students with an integrated and seamless system of 
technology supports that facilitate transition to postsecondary and career settings.
 Information is needed about effective models that promote interagency 
collaboration in the transition process. [3] 

•  Research is needed to study effective approaches to the development of student 
knowledge and self-advocacy skills in the area of technology. For example,
 effective participation in the IEP process and effective strategies for “ne-
gotiating”  with  teachers  and  employers  regarding  the  use  of  technology  is 
needed. [1, 2, 3] 

•  There is a need for baseline data on the present knowledge and skills of key 
stakeholders that can be used in planning and implementing technology training.
  Targeted  groups  should  include  students  with  disabilities,  parents  preservice 
and inservice teachers, postsecondary instructors, educational support 
staff, service providers, librarians, and employers. [1, 2, 3] 

•  Research is needed regarding cost-effective uses of technology to help educators 
 and  others  select  devices  and  services  that  maximize  opportunities  for 
students with disabilities while minimizing costs and duplication of services. [1, 
2, 3] 

• 

Information  is  needed  regarding  effective  training  approaches  for  specific 
stakeholder groups. With regard to the training needs of students, age and in-
terest-appropriate strategies should be identified. The potential use of Internet 
technologies (e.g., electronic mail, Web pages, discussion lists, bulletin boards) 
to train stakeholders should be explored. [1, 2, 3] 

Conclusion 
The use of electronic and information technology is ubiquitous  – in education, employment,
  community  service,  and  recreation.  Computers,  the  Internet,  and  other 
technologies  have  the  potential  to  promote  positive  postsecondary  and  career  outcomes 
for students with disabilities. However, this potential will not be realized unless 
stakeholders secure funding; become more knowledgeable about accessible technolo18


B U R G S T A H L E R  
 

gies and their appropriate use; understand and comply with legal mandates; and develop 
appropriate legislation, policies, standards, and procedures that result in maximizing 
the independence, participation and productivity of students with disabilities as they 
move toward college, careers, and self-determined lives. Ultimately, making all educational 
 and  employment  opportunities  accessible  to  people  with  disabilities  will 
strengthen our economy and create a level playing field for everyone.  

 

References 

Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, 104 STAT. 327. Retrieved June 10, 2002, 

from: http://www.usdoj.gov/crt/ada/statute.html 

Anderson, C.L., & Petch-Hogan, B. (2001). The impact of technology use in special 
education field experience on preservice teachers' perceived technology 
expertise. Journal of Special Education Technology, 16(3), 27-39. 

Anderson-Inman,  L.,  Knox-Quinn,  C.,  &  Szymanski,  M.  (1999).  Computersupported 
studying: stories of successful transition to postsecondary education.
 Career Development for Exceptional Individuals, 22(2), 185-212. 

Bar, L., & Galluzzo, J. (1999) The accessible school: Universal design for educational settings. 

Berkeley, CA: MIG Communications. 

Benz, M., Doren, B., & Yovanoff, P. (1998). Crossing the great divide: Predicting 
productive engagement for young women with disabilities.  Career Development 
for Exceptional Individuals, 21(1), 3-16. 

Benz, R.B., Yavanoff, P., & Doren, B. (1997). School-to-work components that 
predict post-school success for students with and without disabilities. Exceptional 
Children, 63(2), 151-165. 

Blackhurst,  A.E.,  Lahm,  E.A.,  Harrison,  E.M.,  &  Chandler,  W.G.  (1999).  A 
framework for  aligning  technology  with  transition  competencies.  Career 
Development for Exceptional Individuals, 22(2), 153-183. 

Blackorby, J., & Wagner, M. (1996). Longitudinal postschool outcomes of youth 
with  disabilities:  Findings  from  the  National  Longitudinal  Transition 
Study. Exceptional Children, 62, 399-413. 

Blumenkopf, T., Stern, V., Swanson, A., & Wohlers, D. (Eds.). (1996).  Working 
chemists with disabilities: Expanding opportunities in science. American Chemical 
Society. 

Bowe, F.G. (2000). Universal design in education: Teaching nontraditional students. Westport,
 CT: Bergin & Garvey. 

Burgstahler, S. (Ed.). (1993-2001). DO-IT News. Seattle, WA: DO-IT, University of 

Washington. Retrieved June 10, 2002, from 
http://www.washington.edu/doit/Newsletters 

 19

B U R G S T A H L E R  
 

Burgstahler, S. (1997). Peer support: What role can the internet play? Journal of Information 
 Technology  and  Disability,  4(4).  Retrieved  June  10,  2002,  from 
http://www.rit.edu/~easi/itd/itdv04n4/article2.html 

Burgstahler, S. (2001). A collaborative model promotes career success for students 
with  disabilities:  How  DO-IT  does  it.  Journal  of  Vocational  Rehabilitation, 
16(3-4), 209-216. 

Burgstahler, S. (2002). Universal design of distance learning. Journal of Information 

Technology and Disability, 8(1). Retrieved June 10, 2002, from 
http://www.rit.edu/~easi/itd/itdv08n1/burgstahler.htm 

Burgstahler, S., & Cronheim, D. (2001). Supporting peer-peer and mentor-protégé 
relationships on the internet.  Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 
34(1), 59-74. 

Butterworth, J., & Pitt-Catsouphes, M. (1997). Employees with disabilities: What 
managers, supervisors, and co-workers have to say. Employment in the Mainstream,
 22, 5-15. 

Closing the Gap (2001). Closing the gap directory. Henderson, MN: Author. 
DeLoach, C.P. (1992). Career outcomes for college graduates with severe physical 

and sensory disabilities. Journal of Rehabilitation, 58(1). 

Disabilities, Opportunities, Internetworking and Technology (DO -IT) (2001). DOIT 
Snapshots 2001. Seattle: University of Washington. Retrieved June 10, 
2002, from http://www.washington/edu/doit/Snapshots 

Fichten, C., Barile, M., & Asuncion, J.V. (1999).  Learning technologies: students with 
disabilities in postsecondary education. Office of Learning Technologies Adaptech 
Project. Dawson College, Montreal, Canada. 

Fisher, S.K., & Gardner, J.E. (1999). Introduction to technology in transition. Career 
Development for Exceptional Individuals, 22(2), 131-151. 

Frank, K., & Wade, P. (1993). Disabled student services in postsecondary educa-
tion:  Who’s  responsible  for  what?  Journal  of  College  Student  Development, 
34(1), 26-30. 

Gajar, A. (1998). Postsecondary education. In F. Rusch, & J. Chadsey (Eds.), Beyond 
high school: Transition from school to work. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth. 

Gilson, S.F. (1996). Students with disabilities: An increasing voice and presence on 

college campuses. Journal of Vocational Rehabilitation, 6, 263-272. 

Goldberg, L.B.G., & O'Neill, L.M. (2000). Computer technology can empower 

students with learning disabilities. Exceptional Parent, 30(7), 72-74. Retrieved 
June 10, 2002, from 
http://www.cast.org/udl/ComputerTechnologyCanEmpowerStudentswit
hLearningDisabilities960.cfm 

 20

B U R G S T A H L E R  
 

Hasselbring, T.S., & Glaser, C.H. (2000). Use of computer technology to help students 
with special needs. Future of Children, 10(2), 102-22. 

Heidare, F. (1996). Laboratory barriers in science, engineering, and mathematics for students 
with disabilities. New Mexico: New Mexico State University, Regional Alliance 
for Science, Engineering, and Mathematics. 

Henderson,  C.  (2001).  College  freshmen  with  disabilities:  A  biennial  statistical  profile. 

Washington, D.C.: American Council on Education. 

Horn, L., & Berktold, J. (1999).  Students with disabilities in postsecondary education: A 
profile of preparation, participation, and outcomes (Report No. NCES 1999-187). 
Washington, D.C.: United States Department of Education, National Center 
for Education Statistics. 

Individuals with Disabilities Education Act. (1997). Public Law 105-17. Retrieved 

June 10, 2002, from 
http://www.ed.gov/offices/OSERS/Policy/IDEA/the_law.html 

Kaye, H.S. (2000). Disability and the digital divide. Disability Statistics Abstract. San 

Francisco, CA: Disability Statistics Center, University of California, San 
Francisco, and Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Education National 
Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research. 

Lesk, M.E. (1998, November 12). Letter from National Science Foundation. Retrieved 

June 10, 2002, from 
http://www.interact.nsf.gov/CISE/html.nsf/html/access?OpenDocument 

Luecking, R., & Fabian, E. (2000). Paid internships and employment success for youth 

in transition. Career Development for Exceptional Individuals, 23, 205-222. 

Malcom, S. M., &  Matyas, M. L. (Eds.). (1991).  Investing in human potential: Science 
and engineering at the crossroads. Washington, D.C.: American Association for 
the Advancement of Science.  

McCusker, C. (1995). The Americans with Disabilities Act: Its potential for expanding 
the scope of reasonable academic accommodations. Journal of College 
and University Law, 21(4), 619-641. 

McNeil,  J.M.  (1997).  Current  population  reports:  Americans  with  disabilities  1994-95. 
Washington,  DC:  U.  S.  Department  of  Commerce  (Document  Number 
1246). 

McNeil, J. M. (2000, June 29 - July 3). Employment, earnings, and disability. Prepared 
for the 75th Annual Conference of the Western Economic Association International.
 

National Center for Education Statistics (2000a). Teachers' tools for the 21st century: A 

report on teachers' use of technology. U.S. Department of Education, Office of 
Educational Research and Development (NCES 2000102). Retrieved June 
10, 2002, from  http://nces.edu.gov/pubsearch/pubsinfo.asp?pubid= 
2000102 

 21

B U R G S T A H L E R  
 

National Center for Education Statistics (2000b). What are the barriers to the use of 
advanced telecommunications for students with disabilities in public schools? U.S. Department 
of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement 
(NCES 2000042). Retrieved June 10, 2002, from 
http://nces.ed.gov/pubsearch/pubsinfo.asp?pubid=2000042 

National Center for the Study of Postsecondary Educational Supports (NCSPES). 
(2001). National capacity building institute 2001 proceedings. Honolulu, Hawaii: 
University of Hawaii at Manoa.  

National  Council  on  Disability  (2000).  Federal  policy  barriers  to  assistive  technology. 

Washington, DC: Author. 

National Council on Disability and Social Security Administration. (2000). Transition 
 and  post-school  outcomes  for  youth  with  disabilities:  Closing  the  gaps  to  postsecondary 
education and employment. Washington, DC: Author. 

National Organization on Disability. (1998). Harris survey of Americans with disabilities.
 Washington, D.C.: Author. 

National Science Foundation. (2000).  Women, minorities, and persons with disabilities in 
science and engineering. Washington, DC: U. S. Government Printing Office. 
National Science Foundation Task Force on Women, Minorities, and the Handicapped 
in Science and Technology (1989). Changing America: The new face of 
science and engineering. Washington, DC: Author. 

Office of Disability Employment Policy (2001, November). Improving the availability 

of community-based services for people with disabilities. Washington, DC: Author. 
Office of the Federal Register, National Archives and Records Service, General 
Services Administration (2000, December 21). Electronic and information 
technology  accessibility  standards.  The  Federal  Register,  65(246),  80499–
80528. 

Patrick, D.L. (correspondence to Senator Tom Harkin, September 9, 1996). Retrieved 
June 10, 2002, from http://www.usdoj.gov/crt/foia/cltr204.txt 

Phelps, L.A., & Hanley-Maxwell, C. (1997). School-to-work transitions for youth 
with disabilities: A review of outcomes and practices. Review of Educational 
Research, 67(2), 197-226. 

Presidential  Task  Force  on  Employment  of  Adults  with  Disabilities  (1999).  Recharting 
the course: If not now, when?  

Price-Ellingstad, D., & Berry, H.G. (1999/2000). Postsecondary education, vocational 
rehabilitation and students with disabilities: Gaining access to promising 
futures. American Rehabilitation, 25(3), 2-10. 

Reskin, B., & Roos, P. (1990). Job queues. Gender queues. Philadelphia: Temple University 
Press. 

 22

B U R G S T A H L E R  
 

Schmetzke, A. (2001) Online distance education - ‘Anytime, anywhere’ but not for 
everyone,  Information  Technology  and  Disabilities,  7(2).  Retrieved  June  10, 
2002, from http://www.rit.edu/~easi/itd/itdv07n2/axel.htm 

Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (1998, amended). 29 U.S.C. 794(d). Retrieved 
June 10, 2002, from http://www.accessboard.
gov/sec508/guide/act.htm 

Smith, S.J., & Jones, E.D. (1999, April). The obligations to provide assistive tech-
nology: Enhancing the general curriculum access. Journal of Law and Education,
 28(2), 247-65. 

Stern, V., & Summers, L. (Eds.). (1995). Resource directory of scientists and engineers with 
disabilities, (3rd. Edition). Washington, DC: Project on Science, Technology, 
and  Disability,  Directorate  for  Education  and  Human  Resources  Programs,
 American Association for the Advancement of Science. 

Stevens,  S.E.,  Steele,  C.A.,  Jutai,  J.W.,  Kalnins,  I.V.,  Bortolussi,  J.A.,  &  Biggar, 
W.D. (1996). Adolescents with physical disabilities: Some psychosocial aspects 
of health. Journal of Adolescent Health, 19, 157-164. 

Stodden, R.A. (1998). School-to-work transition: Overview of disability legislation. 
In F. Rusch & J. Chadsey (Eds.),  Beyond high school: Transition from school to 
work. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Publishing. 

Stodden, R.A. & Dowrick, P.W. (2000) The present and future of adults with disabilities 
in postsecondary education. Impact, 13(1), 4-5. 

Success stories. (2002). San Rafael, CA: The Alliance for Technology Access. Retrieved 
June 10, 2002, from 
http://www.ataccess.org/resources/fpic/successes.html 

Technology-Related Assistance of Individuals with Disabilities Act of 1988, 29 U.S.C. 2201 

et seq. 

Unger, D., Wehman, P., Yasuda, S., Campbell, L., & Green, H. (2001, March 79). 
Human resource professionals and the employment of persons with dis-
abilities:  A  business  perspective.  Paper  presented  at  National  Capacity 
Building Institute, University of Hawaii. 

Center for Accessible Special Technology(2002).  Universal design for learning. 

Retrieved April 25, 2002, from http://www.cast.org/udl/ 

Waddell, C.D. (1999, May). The growing digital divide in access for people with 
disabilities: Overcoming barriers to barriers to participation in the digital 
economy.  Understanding  the  Digital  Economy  Conference. Retrieved June 10, 
2002, from http://www.icdri.org/the_digital_divide.htm 

Waddell, C.D., & Thomason, K.L. (1998). Is your site ADA-compliant … or a 

lawsuit-in-waiting? The Internet Lawyer, 4. 

 23

B U R G S T A H L E R  
 

Waddell, C.D., & Urban, M.D. (2001).  An overview of law and policy for IT accessibility: 
A  resource  for  state  and  municipal  IT  policy  makers.  International Center for 
Disability  Resources  on  the  Internet.  Retrieved  June  10,  2002,  from 
http://www.icdri.org/an_overview_of_law_.htm  

Wagner, M.M., & Blackorby, J. (1996). Transition from high school  to work to 
college: How special education students fare.  The Future of Children, 6(1), 
103-120. 

West, M., Kregel, J., Getzel, E., Zhu, M., Ipsen, S., & Martin, E. (1993). Beyond 
Section 504: Satisfaction and empowerment of students with disabilities in 
higher education. Exceptional Children, 59(5), 456-467. 

National Center for Universal Design(2002).  What is universal design? (2002). Retrieved 
April 26, 2002, from: 
http://www.design.ncsu.edu/cud/univ_design/ud.htm 

Yelin, E., & Katz, P. (1994a). Labor force trends of persons with and without disabilities.
 Monthly Labor Review, 117, 36-42. 

Yelin, E., & Katz, P. (1994b). Making work more central to disability policy. Milbank 
Quarterly, 72, 593-620. 

 

 24

