The Theory Underlying Concept Maps and How 

to Construct and Use Them1

Technical Report IHMC CmapTools 2006-01 Rev 01-2008 

Joseph D. Novak

Professor Emeritus, Cornell University

and

Senior Research Scientist

Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition (IHMC)

Alberto J. Cañas
Associate Director

Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition (IHMC) 

www.ihmc.us

Introduction

Concept maps are graphical tools for organizing  and representing knowledge. They include 
concepts,  usually   enclosed  in  circles  or  boxes  of  some  type,  and  relationships  between 
concepts indicated by a connecting  line linking two concepts. Words on the line, referred to 
as linking  words or linking  phrases, specify  the relationship between the  two concepts. We 
define  concept  as  a  perceived  regularity  in  events  or  objects,  or  records  of  events  or 
objects, designated by  a  label. The label for most concepts is a  word, although sometimes 
we use  symbols such as + or %, and sometimes more than one word is used. Propositions 
are  statements  about  some  object  or  event  in  the  universe,  either  naturally  occurring  or 
constructed. Propositions contain two or more  concepts connected using linking  words or 
phrases  to  form  a  meaningful  statement.  Sometimes  these  are  called  semantic  units,  or 
units of meaning. Figure 1 shows an example  of a concept map  that describes the structure 
of concept maps and illustrates the above characteristics. 

Another characteristic of concept maps is that the concepts are represented in a hierarchical 
fashion with the  most inclusive, most general  concepts at the  top  of the  map and the more 

1 Revised January 22, 2008. Cite as: “Novak, J. D. & A. J. Cañas, The Theory Underlying Concept Maps and 
How to Construct and Use Them, Technical Report IHMC CmapTools 2006-01 Rev 01-2008, Florida 
Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, 2008, available at: http://cmap.ihmc.us/Publications/
ResearchPapers/TheoryUnderlyingConceptMaps.pdf

- 1 -

Figure 1. A concept map showing the key features of concept maps. Concept maps tend to be read 

progressing from the top downward.

specific, less general concepts arranged hierarchically  below. The  hierarchical  structure for 
a particular domain of knowledge also depends on the  context in which that knowledge is 
being  applied or considered. Therefore, it is best to construct concept maps with reference 
to some particular question we seek to answer, which we have called a focus question. The 
concept  map   may  pertain  to  some  situation  or  event  that  we  are  trying  to  understand 
through  the  organization of  knowledge  in the  form  of  a  concept map,  thus providing  the 
context for the concept map. 

Another important characteristic of concept  maps is the  inclusion of cross-links. These are 
relationships or  links  between  concepts in  different segments  or  domains  of  the  concept 
map. Cross-links help us see how a concept in one domain of knowledge represented on the 
map  is related to  a  concept in another domain  shown on the  map.  In the  creation  of  new 
knowledge,  cross-links  often  represent   creative  leaps  on  the  part  of  the  knowledge 
producer. There  are  two  features of concept maps that are  important in  the  facilitation  of 
creative thinking: the hierarchical structure that  is represented in a good map  and the ability 
to search for and characterize new cross-links. 

A final feature that may  be added to concept maps is specific examples of events or objects 
that help  to  clarify  the  meaning  of  a  given  concept.  Normally  these  are  not  included  in 
ovals or boxes, since they are specific events or objects and do not represent concepts.

- 2 -

Concept  maps  were  developed  in  1972  in  the  course  of  Novak’s  research  program  at 
Cornell  where  he  sought  to  follow  and  understand  changes  in  children’s  knowledge  of 
science  (Novak  &  Musonda,  1991).  During  the  course  of  this  study   the  researchers 
interviewed many  children,  and  they found it  difficult to  identify specific  changes  in the 
children’s understanding  of science  concepts by examination of interview transcripts. This 
program  was based on the learning  psychology  of  David Ausubel (1963; 1968; Ausubel et 
al.,  1978).  The fundamental  idea  in Ausubel’s  cognitive  psychology is that learning  takes 
place  by  the  assimilation  of  new  concepts  and  propositions  into  existing  concept  and 
propositional frameworks held by  the learner. This knowledge structure as held by  a learner 
is  also  referred  to  as  the  individual’s  cognitive  structure.  Out  of  the  necessity  to  find  a 
better  way  to  represent  children’s  conceptual  understanding  emerged  the  idea  of 
representing  children’s knowledge in the form of a concept map. Thus was born a new tool 
not only for use in research, but also for many other uses.

Psychological Foundations of Concept Maps

The  question sometimes arises as to the origin of our first concepts. These are acquired by 
children  during  the  ages  of  birth  to  three  years,  when  they  recognize  regularities  in  the 
world around  them and  begin to identify language  labels or  symbols for  these  regularities 
(Macnamara,  1982).  This  early  learning  of  concepts  is  primarily  a  discovery  learning 
process,  where  the  individual  discerns  patterns  or  regularities  in  events  or  objects  and 
recognizes these  as the same  regularities labeled by  older persons with words or symbols. 
This is a  phenomenal  ability  that is part of  the evolutionary  heritage  of all normal human 
beings.  After  age  3,  new  concept  and  propositional  learning  is  mediated  heavily  by 
language,  and takes place  primarily by a  reception learning  process where  new meanings 
are  obtained  by  asking  questions  and  getting  clarification  of  relationships  between  old 
concepts and propositions and new concepts and propositions. This acquisition is mediated 
in  a  very  important  way  when  concrete  experiences  or  props  are  available;  hence  the 
importance of “hands-on” activity  for science  learning  with young  children, but  this is also 
true with learners of any age and in any subject matter domain. 

In addition  to the  distinction  between  the discovery  learning  process, where  the attributes 
of concepts are  identified autonomously  by the  learner, and the reception learning  process, 
where  attributes of  concepts are  described  using  language  and  transmitted  to  the  learner, 
Ausubel  made  the  very  important  distinction  between  rote  learning  and  meaningful 
learning. Meaningful learning requires three conditions: 

1. The material to be  learned must be conceptually  clear and presented with language and 
examples relatable  to  the  learner’s  prior  knowledge.  Concept maps  can  be  helpful  to 
meet this condition, both by identifying  large general concepts held by  the learner prior 

- 3 -

to instruction on more  specific concepts, and by assisting  in the sequencing  of learning 
tasks  though  progressively   more  explicit  knowledge  that  can  be  anchored  into 
developing conceptual frameworks.

2. The learner must  possess relevant prior knowledge. This condition can be met after age 
3  for  virtually   any   domain  of  subject  matter,  but  it  is  necessary  to  be  careful  and 
explicit  in  building  concept  frameworks  if  one  hopes  to  present  detailed  specific 
knowledge in any  field in subsequent lessons. We see, therefore, that conditions (1) and 
(2) are interrelated and both are important.

3. The  learner  must  choose  to  learn  meaningfully.  The  one  condition  over  which  the 
teacher or  mentor  has only indirect control  is the  motivation  of  students to  choose  to 
learn by attempting  to incorporate new meanings into their prior knowledge, rather than 
simply  memorizing  concept  definitions  or  propositional  statements  or  computational 
procedures. The  indirect control  over this choice is primarily in instructional  strategies 
used and the  evaluation strategies used. Instructional strategies that emphasize relating 
new  knowledge  to  the  learner’s  existing  knowledge  foster  meaningful  learning. 
Evaluation strategies that encourage learners to relate ideas they possess with new ideas 
also  encourage meaningful  learning.  Typical  objective  tests seldom  require  more  than 
rote  learning  (Bloom,  1956;  Holden, 1992).  In fact, the  worst forms of objective  tests, 
or  short-answers tests,  require  verbatim  recall  of  statements  and  this may  be  impeded 
by meaningful learning  where new knowledge  is assimilated into existing  frameworks, 
making  it difficult to  recall specific,  verbatim definitions or  descriptions. This kind of 
problem was recognized years ago in Hoffman’s (1962) The Tyranny of Testing.

As noted  above, it is important to  recognize  that because  individuals vary in  the  quantity 
and quality of the relevant knowledge  they  possess, and in the  strength of their motivation 
to seek ways to incorporate new knowledge  into relevant knowledge  they already possess, 
the  rote-meaningful  distinction  is  not  a  simple  dichotomy  but  rather  a  continuum. 
Creativity can be seen as a very  high level of meaningful learning, and we will discuss this 
further. These ideas are shown in Figure 2. 

People  often  confuse  rote learning  and  meaningful learning  with  teaching  approaches that 
can  vary   on  a  continuum  from  direct  presentation  of  information  (which  may   be 
conceptually obscure or conceptually  explicit)  to  autonomous discovery approaches where 
the  learner  perceives  the  regularities  and  constructs  her/his  own  concepts.  Both  direct 
presentation and discovery teaching  methods can lead to highly rote  or highly meaningful 
learning  by  the learner, depending  on the  disposition of the  learner and the  organization of 
the  instructional materials. These  distinctions are  shown in Figure 3. There is the  mistaken 
notion  that   “inquiry”  studies  will  assure  meaningful  learning.  The  reality  is  that  unless 
students possess at least a rudimentary conceptual understanding  of the  phenomenon they 
are  investigating, the  activity may  lead to little or no gain in their relevant knowledge  and 
may   be  little  more  than  busy   work.  In  fact,  the  research  basis  for  support  of  widely 

- 4 -

Figure 2. Learning can vary from highly rote to highly meaningful. Creativity results from very 

high levels of meaningful learning.

recommended  inquiry  learning  is  largely  absent  (Mayer,  2004;  Kirschner  et  al.,  2006, 
Sweller, et al., 2007).

One  of  the  powerful  uses  of  concept  maps  is not only  as  a  learning  tool  but  also  as  an 
evaluation  tool,  thus  encouraging  students  to  use  meaningful-mode  learning  patterns 
(Mintzes  et  al.,  2000;  Novak,  1990;  Novak  &  Gowin,  1984).  Concept  maps  are  also 
effective  in  identifying  both  valid  and  invalid  ideas  held  by  students,  and  this  will  be 
discussed  further  in  another  section.  They  can  be  as  effective  as  more  time-consuming 
clinical  interviews  for  identifying  the  relevant  knowledge  a  learner  possesses  before  or 
after instruction (Edwards & Fraser, 1983). 

Another  important advance  in  our  understanding  of  learning  is that the human memory  is 
not a single “vessel” to be  filled, but rather a complex  set of interrelated memory systems. 
Figure  4 illustrates the  memory  systems of  the  human mind, and  interactions with  inputs 
from our affective and psychomotor inputs. 

While  all  memory  systems  are  interdependent  (and  have  information  going  in  both 
directions),  the most critical  memory  systems for  incorporating  knowledge  into  long-term 
memory are the short-term and “working  memory.” All incoming  information is organized 
and  processed  in  the  working  memory  by  interaction  with  knowledge  in  long-term 
memory.  The  limiting  feature  here  is  that working  memory can  process only a  relatively 
small number of psychological units (five to nine) at any one moment (Miller, 1956). 

- 5 -

Figure 3. The Rote-Meaningful learning continuum is not the same as the Reception-Discovery 

instructional continuum.

This means that relationships among  two  or three concepts are  about  the  limit of working 
memory’s  processing  capacity.  For  example,  if  a  person  is presented with  a  list of  10-12 
letters or  numbers  to  memorize  in  a  few  seconds,  most will  recall  only 5  to  9  of  these. 
However,  if  the  letters  can  be  grouped  to  form  a  know  word,  or  word-like  unit,  or  the 
numbers can be related to a phone number or something  known, then 10 or more letters or 
numbers can be recalled. In  a  related test,  if we  give  learners 10-12  familiar but unrelated 
words to  memorize  in  a  few  seconds,  most  will  recall  only  5-9  words.  If  the  words are 
unfamiliar, such as technical terms introduced for the  first time, the learner may do well to 
recall  correctly  two  or  three  of  these.  Conversely,  if  the  words  are  familiar  and  can  be 
related to knowledge  the learner has in her/his cognitive  structure, e.g. months of the year, 
12 or more may be easily recalled. 

It should be noted that retention of information learned by  rote still takes place in long term 
memory,  as does  information learned meaningfully;  the difference  is that in rote  learning, 
there is little or no integration of new knowledge with existing  knowledge resulting  in two 
negative  consequences.  First   knowledge  learned  by   rote  tends  to  be  quickly  forgotten, 
unless  much  rehearsed.  Second,  the  knowledge  structure  or  cognitive  structure  of  the 
learner  is  not  enhanced  or  modified  to  clear  up  faulty  ideas.  Thus  misconceptions  will 

- 6 -

Information

Input

Short-Term

Memory

Affective

System

Working
Memory

Motor
System

Long-Term

Memory

Figure 4. Key memory systems of the brain all interact when we are learning.

persist,  and knowledge  learned has little or  no  potential  for  use  in further learning  and/or 
problem solving (Novak, 2002).

Therefore, to structure large bodies of knowledge requires an orderly  sequence of iterations 
between working  memory  and long-term memory  as new knowledge is being  received and 
processed (Anderson, 1992). We believe one of the reasons concept mapping is so powerful 
for the facilitation of meaningful  learning  is that it serves as a kind of template or scaffold 
to  help to  organize  knowledge and  to structure  it,  even though  the structure must be  built 
up piece  by  piece  with  small  units of  interacting  concept  and  propositional  frameworks. 
Many learners and teachers are surprised to see how this simple tool facilitates meaningful 
learning  and  the  creation  of  powerful  knowledge  frameworks  that  not  only  permit 
utilization of the  knowledge  in  new contexts, but also the  retention  of the  knowledge  for 
long  periods of  time  (Novak,  1990;  Novak  &  Wandersee,  1991).  There  is  still  relatively 
little known about memory  processes and how knowledge finally  gets incorporated into our 
brain,  but  it  seems  evident  from  diverse  sources  of  research  that  our  brain  works  to 
organize knowledge in hierarchical frameworks and that learning  approaches that facilitate 
this process significantly  enhance  the  learning  capability of all  learners  (Bransford  et  al., 
1999; Tsien, 2007).

- 7 -

Obviously,  our  brains  store  more  than  concepts and  propositions. While  the  latter  are  the 
principal elements that make up  our knowledge structures and form  our cognitive structure 
in  the brain, we  pause  briefly  to discuss other  forms of  learning.  Iconic  learning involves 
the  storage of images of scenes we encounter, people we  meet, photos, and a host of other 
images.  These  are  also  referred  to  as iconic  memories  (Sperling,  1960;  1963).  While  the 
alphanumeric  images  Sperling  used  in  his studies were  quickly  forgotten,  other  kinds  of 
images are retained much longer. Our brains have a remarkable  capacity for acquiring  and 
retaining  visual  images  of  people  or  photos.  For  example,  in  one  study (Shepard,  1967) 
presented 612 pictures of common scenes to subjects, and later asked which of two similar 
pictures  shown was one  of the  612  seen earlier? After  the  presentation  the  subjects  were 
97%  correct  in  identifying  picture  they  had  seen.  Three  days  later,  they  were  still  92% 
correct,  and  three  months  later they  were  correct 58%  of  the  time. This and  many other 
studies have  shown that humans have  a  remarkable  ability  to recall  images,  although they 
soon forget many of the details in the images. Considering  how often we look at  pennies, it 
is interesting  that the subjects asked to draw a  penny  in a study by Nickerson and Adams 
(1979)  omitted  more  than  half  of  the  features  or  located  them  in  the  wrong  place.  We 
believe  that integrating  various kind of images into a conceptual  framework using  concept 
mapping  software  like  CmapTools (described  below)  could  enhance  iconic  memory,  and 
we hope research on this will be done.

Human’s ability to  recall  sounds is also  remarkable. The  learning  and recall  of sounds is 
also referred to as archic memory. Consider the  musician  who can play hundreds of songs 
without  reading  any  music.  Again  we  are  dealing  with  memories  that  are  not  coded  as 
concepts or propositions.  Studies by  Penfield &  Perot (1963), among  others, indicate  that 
regions of  our brain that are  activated  when  we  hear sounds are  the  same regions that are 
active  when we  recall  sounds. While  we  can locate  regions  of  the brain that are  active  in 
learning  or  recall  of  information  using  positron  emission  tomography  (PET)  scans,  the 
specific  mechanisms  by   which  neurons  store  this  information  is  not   known.  A  full 
discussion of memory mechanisms is beyond the scope of this document.

There are  obvious differences between  individual’s abilities, and some of these  have been 
explored by Gardner (1983). He has proposed a Theory of Multiple Intelligences. His work 
has  received  much  attention  in  education  and  has  served  to  draw  attention  to  the  broad 
range  of differences in human abilities for various kinds of learning  and performance. It is 
good that schools are recognizing that there are important human capabilities other than the 
recall  of  specific  cognitive  information  so  often  the  only  form  of learning  represented  in 
multiple-choice  tests  used  commonly   in  schools  and  corporations.  One  reason  we 
encourage the integration of the broad range of activities represented in our New Model for 
Education  is  to  provide  opportunities  for  these  other  abilities  to  be  represented  and 
expressed.  Nevertheless,  we  seen the  organizing  opportunities afforded by  associating  the 
various activities with an explicit knowledge  structure  as very  beneficial. Time  will tell  if 
future research studies will support this claim. 

- 8 -

While it is true that  some students have difficulty building concept maps and using  these, at 
least early in  their  experience,  this  appears  to  result  primarily  from  years  of  rote-mode 
learning  practice in school  settings rather than as a result of brain structure differences per 
se. So-called “learning  style” differences are, to a large extent, derivative from differences 
in  the patterns of learning  that students have  employed varying  from  high commitment to 
continuous  rote-mode  learning  to  almost  exclusive  commitment  to  meaningful  mode 
learning. It is not easy  to help  students who are habituated to rote mode learning  to move to 
practices of  meaningful  learning. While  concept maps can help,  students also  need  to  be 
taught something  about  brain mechanisms and knowledge organization, and this instruction 
should  accompany  the  use  of  concept  maps.  The  information  in  the  above  paragraphs 
should  become  part  on  the  instructional  program  for  skillful  use  of  concept  maps.  The 
information  provided  in  this  document  could  be  part  of  this  instruction.  Other  ideas  for 
improving  instruction  to  achieve  understanding  of  the  subject  is  available  elsewhere 
(Mintzes et al., 1998).

To  illustrate how difficult it can be  for individuals to modify  their ideas, especially if they 
learn  primarily by  rote,  we  cite  the  example  of  interviews done  by  the  Private  Universe 
Project (PUP)  at  Harvard  University  (Schneps,  1989).  The  staff  of  PUP interviewed  23 
Harvard  graduates,  alumni  and  faculty,  asking  each  “Why  do  we  have  seasons?”  Only 
eleven  concepts, properly  organized  are  needed  to  understand  why  we  have  seasons,  and 
one arrangement of these concepts is shown in Figure 5. The  PUP interviewers found that 
21  of  the  23  interviewed  could  not  explain  why we  have  seasons,  a  topic  that is  taught 
repeatedly in school. Included in this group  was a graduate who had recently  taken a course 
in  the  Physics  of  Planetary   Motion,  who  also  believed  erroneously  that  seasons  were 
caused by the earth moving  closer to the  sun in summer and further away in the winter. In 
fact, the earth is slightly closer to the sun when it is winter in Massachusetts, rather than in 
summer. The primary  reason we have  seasons in latitudes away from the equator is due  to 
the  tilt of the earth on its axis toward the  sun in summer resulting  in longer days and more 
direct radiation, thus greater heating. In winter, the  axis of  the  earth points away from the 
sun, thus resulting  in shorter days and less intense  radiation. What is interfering  with these 
21 Harvard people  is confusion with the common experience  that when we  are closer to a 
fire  or lamp,  the heat is  more  intense  than  when  we  are  further  away. Thus, these  people 
have  failed  to  recognize  that  this  same  phenomenon  is not operating  to  give  seasons  on 
Earth. They  are transferring knowledge from one context to another, but incorrectly. This is 
commonly observed in many, many examples of “misconceptions” in every field of study. 
The  only solution  to  the  problem  of overcoming  misconceptions  is to  help learners learn 
meaningfully,  and  using  concept  maps  can  be  very  helpful.    (For  more  information  on 
misconceptions in science and mathematics see Novak (2002), and: www.mlrg.org).

- 9 -

Figure 5. One representation of the knowledge structure required for understanding why we have 

seasons.

Epistemological Foundations of Concept Maps

As indicated earlier, we defined concept as a perceived regularity (or pattern) in events or 
objects,  or  records of  events or objects, designated  by  label. It is coming  to  be  generally 
recognized  now  that  the  meaningful  learning  processes  described  above  are  the  same 
processes used by  scientists and mathematicians, or experts in any discipline, to construct 
new  knowledge.  In  fact,  Novak has  argued that  new  knowledge  creation is nothing  more 
than a relatively  high level of meaningful learning accomplished by individuals who have a 
well  organized knowledge  structure in  the particular area  of knowledge, and  also a  strong 
emotional  commitment  to  persist  in  finding  new  meanings  (Novak,  1977,  1993,  1998). 
Epistemology is that branch of philosophy that deals with the nature of knowledge and new 
knowledge creation. There is an important relationship between the psychology of learning, 
as  we  understand  it  today,  and  the  growing  consensus  among  philosophers  and 

- 10 -

epistemologists that new knowledge  creation  is a  constructive  process involving  both our 
knowledge  and  our  emotions  or  the  drive  to  create  new  meanings  and  new  ways  to 
represent these meanings. Learners struggling  to create good concept maps are  themselves 
engaged in a  creative process, and this can be challenging, especially to learners who have 
spent most of their life  learning  by rote.  Rote learning  contributes very  little  at  best to our 
knowledge  structures,  and  therefore  cannot  underlie  creative  thinking  or  novel  problem 
solving.

As defined above, concepts and propositions are the building  blocks for knowledge  in any 
domain. We can use the analogy  that concepts are like the atoms of matter and propositions 
are  like  the  molecules  of  matter. There are  only around  100  different kinds of atoms,  and 
these  make  up an  infinite  number  of  different  kinds  of  molecules.  There  are  now about 
460,000 words in the  English language  (most of which are  concept labels), and  these can 
be  combined  to form  an  infinite  number  of  propositions. Although most combinations of 
words might be nonsense, there is still the possibility of creating an infinite number of valid 
and meaningful propositions. Poets and novelists will never run out of new ideas to express 
in new ways. We  shall  never run out of opportunities to create  new knowledge! As people 
create  and  observe  new or existing  objects  or  events, the  creative  people will  continue  to 
create  new concepts and new knowledge. Creating  new methods of observing  or recording 
events usually opens up  new opportunities for new  knowledge  creation.  For  example, the 
creation of the concept mapping method for recording subject’s understandings has led new 
opportunities to study the process of learning and new knowledge creation.

While  there  is  value  in  studying  more  extensively   the  process  of  human  learning  and 
human knowledge creation, this is beyond the scope of this document. The reader is invited 
to  peruse  some of the  references cited.  Some  important considerations for  construction of 
better concept maps and facilitation of learning will be discussed further below.

Constructing Good Concept Maps

In learning  to construct  a concept map, it is important  to begin with a domain of knowledge 
that is very familiar  to the  person  constructing  the  map. Since  concept map structures are 
dependent on  the  context in  which  they will be  used,  it is best to  identify  a  segment of  a 
text, a laboratory or field activity, or a particular problem  or question that one is trying  to 
understand. This creates a  context  that will help  to  determine  the hierarchical  structure  of 
the  concept  map.  It  is also  helpful  to  select  a  limited  domain  of  knowledge  for  the  first 
concept maps. 

A good way to define the context for a  concept map is to construct a Focus Question, that 
is,  a  question  that clearly  specifies the  problem  or  issue  the  concept map should  help  to 
resolve. Every  concept map responds  to  a  focus question,  and a  good focus question can 

- 11 -

lead to a much richer concept map. When learning to construct concept maps, learners tend 
to  deviate  from  the  focus  question  and  build  a  concept  map that may  be  related  to  the 
domain,  but  which  does  not  answer  the  question.  It is  often  stated  that  the  first step  to 
learning about something is to ask the right questions.

Given a selected domain and a  defined question or problem  in this domain, the next step is 
to  identify   the  key  concepts  that  apply  to  this  domain.  Usually  15  to  25  concepts  will 
suffice. These concepts could be listed, and then from this list a rank ordered list should be 
established  from  the  most general,  most inclusive  concept,  for this particular  problem  or 
situation at the top of the list, to the most specific, least general concept at the bottom of the 
list. Although this rank order may be only approximate, it helps to begin the process of map 
construction.  We  refer to  the  list  of  concepts  as a  parking  lot,  since  we  will  move  these 
concepts  into  the  concept  map  as  we  determine  where  they  fit  in.  Some  concepts  may 
remain in the parking  lot as the map  is completed if the mapmaker sees no good connection 
for these with other concepts in the map.

The next step is to construct a preliminary  concept map. This can be  done by  writing  all of 
the  concepts  on  Post-itsTM,  or  preferably by using  the  IHMC  CmapTools  (Cañas  et  al., 
2004b, http://cmap.ihmc.us)  computer software  program  described  below. Post-its allow a 
group to work on a whiteboard or butcher paper and to move concepts around easily. This 
is  necessary  as  one  begins  to  struggle  with  the  process  of  building  a  good  hierarchical 
organization.  Computer  software  programs  are  even  better  in  that  they allow  moving  of 
concepts together with linking  statements and the moving  of  groups of concepts and links 
to restructure the map. When CmapTools is used in conjunction with a computer projector, 
two or more individuals can easily collaborate  in building  a  concept map and see changes 
as  they   progress  in  their  work.  CmapTools  also  allows  for  collaboration  between 
individuals  in  the  same  room  or  anywhere  in  the  world,  and  the  maps  can  be  built 
synchronously or asynchronously, depending on the mapmakers’ schedules. 

It is important to recognize that a concept map is never finished. After a preliminary  map is 
constructed, it is always necessary to revise  this map. Other  concepts can be  added. Good 
maps usually  result from  three  to many revisions. This is one  reason why  using  computer 
software is helpful. 
 
Once  the  preliminary map is built, cross-links should be  sought.  These  are  links between 
concepts in different segments or domains of  knowledge on the map  that help  to illustrate 
how these  domains  are related to one  another. Cross-links are  important in  order to  show 
that the learner understands the relationships between the sub-domains in the map. 

It is important to help  students recognize  that all concepts are  in some  way  related  to  one 
another.  Therefore,  it is  necessary  to  be  selective  in  identifying  cross-links, and  to  be  as 
precise  as  possible  in  identifying  linking  words  that  connect  concepts.  In  addition,  one 
should  avoid  “sentences in  the  boxes”, that  is,  full  sentences used as  concepts,  since  this 

- 12 -

usually   indicates  that  a  whole  subsection  of  the  map  could  be  constructed  from  the 
statement in  the box. “String  maps” illustrate either poor understanding  of the  material  or 
an inadequate restructuring of the map. Figure 6 shows an example of a string map. 

Figure 6. A “string” map created by a fourth grade student following a class field trip to a paper mill. 
The class identified concepts in the parking lot on the left, but this student was not successful in using 
many of these and her map makes little sense. This student was a good oral reader, but she had very 
poor reading comprehension and was a committed rote learner (see Novak & Gowin, 1984, page 108).

Students  often  comment  that  it   is  hard  to  add  linking  words  onto  the  “lines”  of  their 
concept map. This is because they poorly  understand the relationship  between the concepts, 
or the  meanings of the  concepts, and it is the  linking  words that  specify  this relationship. 
Once  students begin  to focus-in  on  good  linking  words, and on the  identification of good 
cross-links,  they  can see  that every concept could  be related to  every other concept.  This 
also  produces some  frustration,  and they  must choose  to  identify the  most prominent and 
most useful cross-links. This process involves what Bloom (1956) identified as high levels 
of  cognitive  performance,  namely  evaluation  and  synthesis  of  knowledge.  Concept 
mapping  is an easy way  to encourage  very high levels of cognitive  performance, when the 
process  is  done  well.  This  is  one  reason  concept  mapping  can  also  be  a  very  powerful 
evaluation tool (Edmondson, 2000). 

- 13 -

Finally, the  map should be revised,  concepts re-positioned in  ways that lend to clarity  and 
better over-all structure, and a “final” map prepared. When computer software is used, one 
can go back, change the size and font style, and add colors to “dress up” the concept map. 

Thus,  we  see  that concept  maps are  not only  a  powerful  tool  for  capturing,  representing, 
and archiving knowledge of individuals, but also a powerful tool to create new knowledge.

The CmapTools Software Toolkit

The  CmapTools  (Cañas  et  al.,  2004b)  software  (available  for  download  at:  http://
cmap.ihmc.us)  developed  at   the  Institute  for  Human  and  Machine  Cognition  brings 
together  the  strengths  of  concept mapping  with  the  power of  technology,  particularly  the 
Internet and  the  World Wide Web  (WWW). The software  not only  makes it easy for users 
of  all  ages to  construct and  modify concept maps  in a  similar way  that a  word  processor 
makes it easy to write text, it allows users to collaborate at a distance in the construction in 
their  maps, publish  their  concept maps so  anybody on  the  Internet can  access them, link 

Figure 7. A concept map about birds constructed by a high-school student. Icons under the concepts provide 

links to resources (e.g., images, pictures, web pages, videos, other concept maps), some of which are shown in 

the Figure.

- 14 -

resources  to  their  maps  to  further  explain  their  contents,  and  search  the  WWW  for 
information related to the map.

The  software  allows  the  user  to  link  resources  (photos,  images,  graphs,  videos,  charts, 
tables, texts, WWW  pages or other concept maps)  located  anywhere on the  Internet or  in 
personal  files to  concepts or  linking  words  in a  concept map through a  simple  drag-anddrop 
operation. Links to these resources are displayed as icons underneath the  concepts, as 
shown in Figure 7. Clicking on one of these icons will display  a list of links from which the 
user can select to open the  linked resource. Using  CmapTools, it is possible to use concept 
maps to access any material that can be presented digitally, including  materials prepared by 
the  mapmaker.  In this way, concept maps can serve  as the  indexing  and navigational  tools 
for  complex  domains of  knowledge,  as  will  be  illustrated  later  with  NASA materials  on 
Mars (Briggs et al., 2004). By  facilitating  the linking  between concept maps,  learners can 
construct  Knowledge  Models  (Cañas  et  al.,  2003b;  Cañas  et  al.,  2005),  which  are 
collections  of  concept maps  with linked resources about a  particular topic, demonstrating 
that their understanding about a domain is not limited to a single concept map.

Facilitating Collaborative and Distance Learning

There is  a  growing  body  of research that shows that when  students work  in small groups 
and cooperate in striving  to learn subject matter, positive  cognitive and affective outcomes 
result (Johnson  et  al.,  1981;  Berk &  Winsler,  1995).  Vygotsky (1978) introduced the  idea 
that language  and  social  dialogue  can  support learning,  especially  when  members  of  the 
social group are at about  the same Zone of Proximal Development (ZPD). He describes the 
ZPD as that level  of understanding  for a  given  subject where  the  learner can progress on 
her/his own, with  minimal  aid  from  a  tutor. When  students work cooperatively in groups 
and  use  concept  maps  to  guide  their  learning,  significantly   greater  learning  occurs 
(Preszler,  2004).  In  our  work  with  both  teachers  and  students,  small  groups  working 
cooperatively to construct concept maps have  proven to be useful in many contexts. In the 
early 1990s,  Latin  America,  students  using  the  IBM Net (before  the  Internet)  were  very 
successful in creating concept maps both with students in their classroom and with students 
in  other  countries (Cañas et  al.,  2001).  In  our  own  classes and  workshops,  and in  classes 
taught by our  students  and  colleagues,  small  groups  of  students  working  collectively  to 
construct concept maps can produce some remarkably good maps. 

CmapTools  provides  extensive  support   for  collaborative  work  during  concept  map 
construction.  The  concept  maps  built  using  CmapTools  can  be  stored  on  servers 
(CmapServers, see:  Cañas  et  al.,  2003a)  where  anybody on  the  Internet can access them. 
Many of  the  CmapServers  are  “public”,  allowing  anybody (no  authorization  needed)  to 
publish  their  collections  of  concept  maps  and  resources  (Cañas  et  al.,  2004a).  Through 
CmapServers, users of all ages and working  in many  disciplines have  published thousands 
of maps on all topics and domains. While concept maps on these public servers are  only  a 

- 15 -

sample of concept maps submitted by  persons using CmapTools, and some do not meet our 
criteria  of  good  concept  maps,  they  nevertheless  serve  to  illustrate  diverse  applications. 
When a  concept map is saved to  a  CmapServer,  a  “web  page”  version of the  map is also 
stored, so a WWW browser is sufficient to browse through all the published concept maps.

Through  the  storing  of  concept  maps  in  CmapServers,  CmapTools  encourages 
collaboration among  users constructing the  maps. When maps are stored in a server on the 
Internet,  users with  appropriate  permissions (Cañas et  al., 2003c)  can edit shared  concept 
maps  at  the  same  time  (synchronously)  or  at  their  convenience  (asynchronously). 
“Discussion  threads”  and  “Annotations”  in  the  form  of  electronic  “Post-It”  notes can  be 
used to make anecdotal  comments on concept maps or during  map construction. The  high 
degree of explicitness of concept maps makes them  an ideal  vehicle for exchange  of ideas 
or  for  the  collaborative  construction  of  new  knowledge.  We  have  also  found  that  the 
obstacles  deriving  from  personal  insecurities  and  fear  of  embarrassment  are  largely 
circumvented, since critical comments are directed at the concept map, not at the person(s) 
building  the  map.  Having  learners  comment on  each  other’s concept maps, whether they 
are  in the  same  classroom  or  in  different schools, is an effective  form  of  peer-review and 
collaboration.

The  extensive  support  that  CmapTools  provides  for  the  collaborative  construction  of 
concept maps by groups, whether they are  at the  same location or in distant  locations, has 
encouraged  the  increasing  use  of  collaboration  during  map  building.  In  a  variety  of 
educational  settings,  concept  mapping  in  small  groups  has  served  us  well  in  tasks  as 
diverse as understanding  ideas in assimilation learning theory  to clarifying  job conflicts for 
conflict resolution  in profit and  non-profit corporations  (e.g.,  Beirute  &  Mayorga,  2004). 
Concept  maps  are  now  beginning  to  be  used  in  corporations  to  help  teams  clarify  and 
articulate  the  knowledge  needed  to  solve  problems  ranging  from  the  design  of  new 
products to marketing to administrative problem resolution. 

A New Model for Education

A Concept Map-Centered Learning Environment

CmapTools provides a variety of features that make it possible for teachers to use  concept 
maps for a variety of the tasks that students perform (Cañas & Novak, 2005). In addition to 
a  network  environment  that  fosters  collaboration  and  the  possibility  of  constructing 
knowledge  models,  the  software  allows  users,  among  other  features,  to  (a)  search  for 
information based on a concept map  (Carvalho et al., 2001), by which a student can use the 
Cmap  to  research  information to  learn  more  about the  topic, leading  to  an improved map 
with  linked resources,  and  iteratively proceed on another  search; (b) record the process of 
constructing  a  Cmap  for  later  playback,  providing  support  to  the  teacher  in  what  is 

- 16 -

considered to  be  a key aspect of  concept mapping: the  process of constructing  a  map;  (c) 
piece-wise  display  a  concept  map  and  associated  resources  full-screen  for  oral 
presentations;  (d)  graphically  compare  two  Cmaps,  allowing  the  teacher  to  compare  the 
student’s  map  to  his/hers for  an  initial  evaluation. The  concept map can thus  become  an 
artifact  around  which  the  various  activities  of  the  learning  process  can  be  centered,  as 
shown in Figure 8.

Figure 8. The whole spectrum of learning activities can be integrated using CmapTools, incorporating 

various learning activities recorded via the software creating a digital portfolio as a product of the learning.

Based  on  the  features  provided  by  CmapTools,  the  student   can  use  the  concept   map 
prepared as a pre-test as an initial step towards learning the pieces of knowledge that he/she 
needs to better understand, as the  basis on which to perform  the research that leads to this 
understanding,  as  a  way  to  organize  the  various  sources  from  which  the  student  will 
construct this understanding, as the artifact with which to collaborate with peers, and as the 
means  to  present his/her  findings  at the  end  of  the  unit.  Furthermore,  the  concept  maps 
constructed by  the  student  can become the  foundation for a portfolio evaluation (see Vitale 
& Romance, 2000) of his/her performance.

Focus Question, Parking Lots and Expert Skeleton Maps 

A  concept  map-centered  learning  environment  implies  that  concept  maps  are  used 
throughout  the  development  of  a  learning  unit  or  module.  Concept  maps  within  this 

- 17 -

environment are likely  to be used as the mechanism to determine the level of understanding 
students have  about the  topic  being  studied  before  the  topic  is introduced.  The  maps are 
then developed, extended  and refined as the  students develop  other activities on the  topic 
and  increase  their  understanding,  possibly   concluding  with  complex  knowledge  models 
that link  resources,  results,  experiments,  etc.,  and  that  can  be  used  if  desired  as  a  final 
presentation by the students. 

Just as there  are many possible uses of concept maps within the classroom activities, there 
are  a  variety   of  “starting  points”  for  the  construction  of  the  initial  concept  maps  by 
students. 

Each student can construct the initial concept  map  individually, giving the teacher feedback 
on the level of understanding  of every student. Within the option of individual construction 
of the map, the students can be allowed to collaborate through a Knowledge Soup  (Cañas et 
al., 1995; Cañas et  al., 2001), where students are able to share propositions but not see each 
other’s  maps (see  Figure  9). The  concept map  can  be constructed  by  students  working  in 
couples or  small groups, where  the teacher must pay attention to the  level  of participation 
of every student. CmapTools has a recorder feature that allows recording  and playback of 
steps in map construction, including identifications of each contributor.

Figure 9. Concept map that is part of a collaborative Knowledge Soup. The list of propositions on the top 
right window are automatically derived from the Cmap, and those with a “pin” have been “published”. The 

lower right window shows propositions from other participants in Soup, some of which have discussion 

threads attached questioning or commenting on the proposition.

- 18 -

The  concept map  can also be a class effort, using  a  projector, where all  students give their 
opinion and  participate  in  the construction  of  the  map. Teachers  must be alert to evaluate 
the individual participation of every student.

Likewise, the  starting  point from  which the map is constructed can vary  depending  on the 
expected  previous  understanding  by  the  students,  the  difficulty  and  novelty of  the  topic, 
and the teacher’s confidence in mastering the topic.

Focus Question

The  starting  point  for  constructing  a  concept  map  can consist of only the  focus question. 
For example, “How do  we measure time?” can  be  given to the  students as the question  to 
answer  through  the  construction of the  concept map. The  type  of  focus question  makes a 
difference  in  the type  of  concept maps  that the  student builds. A question  like  “What are 
plants?” will lead to a declarative, more classificatory concept map than the question “Why 
do we need plants?”  Experiments show that not  only the  focus question,  but also the  root 
concept of a  concept map  have  a  strong  influence  on  the  quality  of  the  resulting  concept 
map  (Derbentseva et al., 2004, 2006). It is important that a question be given and not just a 

Figure 10. The beginning of a concept map with a focus question and a parking lot with concepts to be 

included in the map.

- 19 -

topic  (e.g.  “make  a  concept  map  about plants”),  since  answering  the  question  helps  the 
students focus on their  maps. Whenever a  concept map  is made with CmapTools and then 
saved,  the  maker  is  asked  to  provide  a  focus  question,  as  well  as  key  concepts  for  this 
concept map.

Parking Lot

We  refer to  a  list of concept waiting  to  be  added  to a  concept map as the  parking  lot  of 
concepts. The staring  point for the construction of the concept map can be a list of concepts 
that the  teacher wants to  make  sure  all  students  include  in  their  map. An  example  of  this 
was given in Figure  6 above. Figure  10 presents the focus question and parking  lot for the 
focus question  “What is the  structure  of  the  Universe?” The  student, group of students, or 
class is expected to build a concept map that answers the  question and includes at least the 
concepts  in  the  list.  Experienced  concept  mappers  agree  with  researchers  that  the  most 
challenging  and  difficult  aspect  of  constructing  a  concept  map   is  constructing  the 
propositions;  that is,  determining  what linking  phrases will  clearly  depict the relationship 
between concepts. So giving  the student some of the concepts does not  take away from the 
difficulty  in  the  map  construction,  although  it  may somewhat  limit  the  creativity of  the 
student in  selecting  the  concepts  to include.  It does provide  the  teacher  with  insight into 
which concepts the student(s) had trouble integrating  into the concept map, indicating  little 
or no understanding of these concepts.

Expert Skeleton Maps

For  difficult  topics  –  whether  difficult  for  the  students  as  determined  by   the  teacher’s 
previous experience,  or  difficult for the  teacher because of his/her background  –  using  an 
“expert  skeleton”  concept map  is  an  alternative.  An  “expert  skeleton”  concept map  has 
been previously  prepared by  an expert on the topic, and permits both students and teachers 
to build their knowledge on a solid foundation. “Expert skeleton” concept maps serve as a 
guide  or  scaffold  or  aid  to  learning  in  a  way  analogous  to  the  use  of  scaffolding  in 
constructing or refurbishing a building.

Figure  11  is  an “expert skeleton”  concept  map  that corresponds  to  the  same  topic  as the 
“parking  lot” in Figure 10. Observe that in this example, some of the concepts were left in 
the “parking lot” for the student to add to the concept map. 

The  use  of  “expert skeleton”  concept maps  is  a  research  topic  we  are  pursuing,  and  for 
which we don’t have as much experience as with the focus question and parking lot starting 
points.  O’Donnell, Dansereau, &  Hall (2002) have  shown that “knowledge  maps” can act 
as scaffolds to facilitate learning.

It is important to note that  the “expert skeleton” concept maps should be  built by  an expert 
on the topic. The intention is that the expert will be better at selecting  the small number of 

- 20 -

concepts  that are  key  to  understanding  the  topic, and  express accurately the  relationships 
between  these  concepts.  In  general,  it  is  much  more  difficult  to  build  a  good,  accurate 
concept map about a  topic  with  a  small  number  of concepts (e.g.,  four  or five)  than  with 
fifteen to twenty concepts. 

There is no predetermined size that an “expert skeleton”  concept map  should have. But the 
expected final number of concepts in the map is a function of the number of concepts in the 
“skeleton”.  For  example,  a  “skeleton  map”  that  consists  of  five  concepts  should  be 
expanded by the student to a map with 15 to 20 concepts. If the “skeleton” map contains 20 

Figure 11. An expert skeleton concept map dealing with a key concept that needs to be understood as a 
foundation for learning science, based on the parking lot from Figure 10. Some concepts were left in the 

parking lot for the student to add to the Cmap. 

- 21 -

concepts,  which  makes  it  more  of  a  complete  map,  the  final  map could  be  expected  to 
contain about 50 to 60 concepts. In this case, we are probably referring  to using a relatively 
complete (not skeleton) map as a scaffold, expecting  students to go deeper into the topic by 
creating several submaps that are linked to the starting point map.

We  foresee a  program of using  “expert  skeleton”  maps to scaffold learning  beginning  with 
the development of a series of concept  maps in a discipline, starting  with the most general, 
most inclusive  ideas and  then  gradually moving  to  more  specific  concept maps  that will 
guide  the learners. For example, Figure  11 shows a “expert skeleton” concept map for the 

Figure 12. An Energy transformation Cmap that could be accessed by linking it to the “Energy” concept in 

the concept map in Figure 11, and a Photosynthesis Cmap that may be linked to it.

sciences that encompasses key  major concepts needed to understand science. Learners can 
begin with such  a  map,  add concepts from the  parking  lot,  link digital  resources and  also 
construct more specific  submaps. More specific expert concept maps can also be provided, 
such  as that  shown in  Figure  12. Here  we  also see  a  submap  that might be  created  by  a 
group of  learners,  and a  sample  of two  resources that could be  accessed  via  icons on the 
submap. 

- 22 -

One of the  advantages in  using  CmapTools for  scaffolding  learning  is the search function 
mentioned  above,  which  permits  access  to  WWW  resources  that  are  screened  to  fit the 
context of meanings defined by the concept map (Carvalho et al., 2001; Leake et al., 2004). 
Thus if one clicks on a concept such as “electrical energy” in Figure 12 and selects one of 
the  “search”  menu  options,  CmapTools  will  retrieve  WWW  resources that not only deal 
with electricity, but also relate to other concepts in the map. The program tries to figure out 
what  the  Cmap  is  about  and  prepare  a  query  for  Web  search  engines  that  will  generate 
results that  are  relevant to  the  ideas  being  developed  in  the  concept map.  Of  course, the 
learner still  needs to select new concepts from the material and construct new propositions 
on the concept map that add meanings and clarity  to the  map. Thus, the  learner or team of 
learners is very actively  engaged in the meaning  building process, an essential requirement 
for meaningful learning to occur.

Learners  can  also  engage  in  laboratory or  field  studies  that  will  add  important concrete 
experiences  needed  for  developing  fuller  meanings  to  concepts,  and  sometimes  the 
excitement that comes with discovering new ideas or relationships.

The  extent of materials and ideas that can be built into knowledge structures using  “expert 
skeleton”  concept maps, CmapTools,  and  WWW resources far surpass what any  textbook 
or any teacher  could provide.  In fact, teachers supervising  this kind  of  study are likely to 
learn as many new things as their students. Moreover, beginning  with the “expert skeleton” 
maps  as  starting  points  reduces  the  chance  that  misconceptions  or  faulty  ideas  held  by 
learners  or  teachers  will  be  reinforced  and  maximize  the  chance  that  they  will  build 
knowledge structures that in time remove or diminish misconceptions (Novak, 2002).

The World of Science Project

In  1966,  Bobbs-Merrill  published  an  elementary  science  textbook  series,  The  World  of 
Science, written largely  by Novak with the objective  of introducing  basic science concepts 
to elementary school students and teachers. Unlike most  elementary science textbooks, this 
series  presents  in-depth  instruction  in  basic  concepts  at  all  grade  levels,  including 
instruction  in  concepts  dealing  with  the  nature  of  science,  nature  of  matter,  energy  and 
energy  transformations.  The  books  have  been  scanned  and  a  DVD  of  all  six  books  is 
available.  Our  plan  is  to  use  The  World  of  Science  books  as  a  starting  point  for  a 
demonstration project for A New Model for Education. To begin, “expert skeleton” concept 
maps have  been  prepared  for  some  sections  of the  grade  two  book and  the  whole  of the 
grade  four book of the World of Science  entitled The  Expanding  World of  Science. All  of 
these  concept  maps  are  publicly  available  on  the  CmapTools  Network2.  The  “expert 
skeleton”  concept maps would serve as a  starting  point for students and  teachers for each 
section  illustrated  in  the  book,  and  then  students  would  use  these  Cmaps  together  with 

2 Go to http://cmapdp.ihmc.us, Click on IHMC – Internal - 2, The World of Science folder.

- 23 -

Figure 13. Schema showing the New Model for Education with an “expert skeleton” concept map that 

can serve as the “backbone” for an emerging portfolio in science.

CmapTools to search the WWW for pertinent  resources and ideas. Figure 13 illustrates one 
of the “expert skeleton” concept maps that could be used as the starting  point for building  a 
knowledge model, preferably students working in teams and sharing ideas. 

The  science  books  provide  relevant   readings  and  suggested  activities.  It  would  be 
important  for  the  teacher  to  help  students  perform  these  activities,  and  similar  related 
activities, some of which might by suggested in WWW resources. Learners would also add 
their own concepts to the  “expert skeleton” concept map, as well as resources identified in 
readings and from the Internet. Figure 14 illustrates a stage in this process3. 

Obviously,  it would  be  a  very  deficient science  program that did  nothing  more  than have 
students copy and do  some  building  on the  “expert skeleton”  concept maps provided  for 
grade  two,  or  for any other grade.  Students need concrete,  hands on experiences with real 
things and to  observe  real  phenomena  to put meaning  into  the concept labels provided  in 
the concept maps and other resources. 

3 The World of Science books were published in 1966 and some of the figures are dated.

- 24 -

A pilot  program  effort is already  in progress in Italy, where Giuseppe Valittuti  (2004)  and 
his  colleagues  are  now  working  to  translate  The  World  of  Science  books  into  Italian. 
Valittuti  and  his colleagues  have  obtained  funding  from  the  Italian  Ministry  of Education 
for  teacher  training  and  a  number  of  elementary  school  teams  began  working  with  the 
World of Science concept maps and other resources during  the 2005-2006 year. The plan is 
to  have  four sets of schools focus on different aspects of The World  of Science  series and 
produce  photos and videos of students doing  projects that illustrate and utilize the  various 
science concepts. There will be much feedback from classrooms helping  the teams to refine 
their work, sharing  “electronic portfolios” using  CmapTools. This feedback should help us 

Figure 14. Schema showing the New Model for Education with concepts and resources added to the 

“expert skeleton” concept map, plus a page from a World of Science book providing relevant reading and 

activities.

to  rapidly  refine  concept maps,  techniques  and  approaches for  improving  practice  of  the 
New  Model  for  Education.  The  CmapTools  Network  may  serve  as  a  clearinghouse  for 
some  of these  efforts through its Public  servers in Italy and other countries. We anticipate 
that an abundance  of  both  anecdotal  and empirical  data  will  flow  from  these  efforts in  a 
few years. Based on the solid theoretical and related research findings now available, there 
is every reason to be optimistic  that these innovative efforts will be  successful. Progress of 
this project can be followed at: www.leparoledellascienza.it.

- 25 -

Problems of Implementation

The  greatest  challenge  we  may  expect  is  to  change  the  school  situational  factors  in  the 
direction  of  teacher  as  coach  and  learner  from  the  prevailing  model  of  teachers  as 
disseminator of information. We  know that we need to engage teachers and administrators 
in  training  programs that can model  the  new educational  approaches, and  we need  to seek 
their  counsel  on  ways  to  improve  on  the  New  Model  for  Education.  There  is  also  the 
challenge of changing  assessment practices that now rely primarily  on multiple-choice tests 
that  measure  mainly  rote  recall  of  information,  to  performance-based  tests  that  require 
students to  demonstrate that they understand basic concepts and can  use these  concepts in 
novel  problems solving, and that they can  use Internet resources to grow and modify their 
concepts  and  learn  new  concepts.  There  remains  in  the  New  Model  plenty  of  room  for 
acquisition  of  specific  facts  and  procedures,  but  now  these  should  be  learned  within  the 
context of  powerful  conceptual  frameworks.  Research  (Bransford et  al.,  1999)  has shown 
that factual information acquired  in a  context  of  meaningful  learning  is not only  retained 
longer, but this information can be used much more successfully to solve new problems.

We  might expect some opposition to implementation of the New Model of Education from 
individuals who  believe  that “inquiry”  learning  is the  only way to  improve  education.  In 
fact, research overwhelmingly  supports the value of “guided inquiry”, such as that involved 
in A New Model for Education (Mayer, 2004; Kirschner et al., 2006, Sweller, et al., 2007).

There is an enormous job of teacher education that needs to be done before the New Model 
can  be  implemented  in  schools.  Teachers  need  to  become  familiar  with  the  use  of 
CmapTools  software  and  the  various  tools it  contains.  They also  need  to  learn  about the 
theory  underlying  concept mapping,  including  the  ideas  in  this  paper.  Teacher  education 
programs should model  the  kind  of  learning  we  are  recommending,  and we  might use  as 
“expert skeleton”  concept maps some of the  concept maps available  from Novak’s (1998) 
book accessible  at the  “IHMC Internal”  CmapTools Place, under  the folder  “Joe  Novak’s/
JNsLCUBook”.  Teachers  should  work  collaboratively   to  build  on  some  of  the  simpler 
concept maps dealing  with education ideas and perhaps add resources to some of the more 
complex  concept  maps.  Even  with  the  current  state  of  technology  and  pedagogical 
understandings,  it  is possible  for  schools,  states  or  countries  to  mount a  New Model  for 
Education. 

Concept Maps for Evaluation

We  are now beginning  to see in many science textbooks the  inclusion of concept mapping 
as  one  way to  summarize  understandings  acquired  by students  after  they  study a  unit or 
chapter. Change  in school practices is always slow, but it is likely  that the  use  of  concept 

- 26 -

maps in school instruction will increase substantially in the next decade or two. ractices for 
assessing  student understanding  of subject  matter are  also  available (Mintzes et al., 2000). 
When concept maps are used in instruction, they  can also be used for evaluation. There is 
nothing  written  in  stone  that says  multiple  choice  tests must  be  used  from  grade  school 
through  university,  and  perhaps  in  time  even  national  achievement  exams  will  utilize 
concept mapping as a powerful evaluation tool. This is a chicken-and-egg  problem because 

Figure 15. A concept map prepared cooperatively by the faculty of the College of Veterinary Medicine 

at Cornell University to show the over-all structure for a revised curriculum.

- 27 -

concept maps cannot be  required on national  achievement tests if  most  students have  not 
been given opportunities to  learn  to use  this knowledge  representation  tool. On the  other 
hand,  if  state,  regional,  and  national  exams  would  begin  to  include  concept  maps  as  a 
segment of the exam, there would be a great incentive for teachers to teach students how to 
use this tool. Hopefully, in the next  two decades, this will come to pass. Currently  there are 
a  number  of  projects  in  the  USA and  elsewhere  that are  doing  research  to  see  if  better 
evaluation tools can  be  developed,  including  the use  of concept maps. We  should begin to 
see  significant advances in this  area  in the  next several  years. Some  features of  the  latest 
versions of CmapTools also facilitate the use of concept maps for assessment. For example, 
the  “Compare concept maps” tool allows the comparison of an “expert” concept map for a 
topic  with  maps  constructed  by  students,  and  all  similar  or  different  concepts  and 
propositions are shown in color. 

Concept Maps and Curriculum Planning

In curriculum  planning, concept maps can be enormously useful. They  present in a highly 
concise manner the key concepts and principles to be taught. The hierarchical organization 
of  concept  maps  suggests  more  optimal  sequencing  of  instructional  material.  Since  the 
fundamental characteristic of meaningful learning  is integration of new knowledge with the 
learners’  previous  concept  and  propositional  frameworks,  proceeding  from  the  more 
general,  more  inclusive  concepts  to  the  more  specific  information  usually   serves  to 
encourage  and  enhance  meaningful  learning.  Thus,  in  curriculum  planning,  we  need  to 
construct a  global  “macro map”  showing  the major ideas we  plan  to present in the  whole 
course,  or  in  a  whole  curriculum,  and  also  more  specific  “micro  maps”  to  show  the 
knowledge  structure  for  a  very  specific  segment  of  the  instructional  program.  Faculty 
working  independently  or  collaboratively  can  redesign  course  syllabi  or  an  entire 
curriculum.  For  example,  faculty  working  together  to  plan  instruction  in  veterinary 
medicine at Cornell University constructed the concept map shown in Figure 15. 

Using  concept  maps  in  planning  a  curriculum  or  instruction  on  a  specific  topic  helps  to 
make the  instruction  “conceptually  transparent” to students. Many students have  difficulty 
identifying  the  important concepts in a  text,  lecture or  other form  of  presentation.  Part of 
the  problem  stems  from  a  pattern  of  learning  that  simply  requires  memorization  of 
information,  and  no  evaluation  of  the  information  is  required.  Such  students  fail  to 
construct powerful concept and propositional frameworks, leading  them to see learning  as a 
blur  of  myriad  facts,  dates,  names,  equations,  or  procedural  rules  to  be  memorized.  For 
these  students, the  subject matter of most disciplines, and especially  science, mathematics, 
and history, is a cacophony of information to memorize, and they usually  find this boring. 
Many feel they cannot master knowledge in the field. If concept maps are used in planning 
instruction  and  students  are  required  to  construct  concept  maps  as  they  are  learning, 
previously  unsuccessful students can become successful in making  sense out of science and 

- 28 -

any other  discipline,  acquiring  a  feeling  of  control  over  the  subject matter  (Bascones  & 
Novak, 1985; Novak, 1991, 1998).

Capturing and Archiving Expert Knowledge

One of the uses of concept maps that is growing  at a fast rate is the use of concept maps to 
capture the “tacit” knowledge of experts. Experts know many things that they often cannot 
articulate  well  to  others.  This  tacit  knowledge  is  acquired  over  years  of  experience  and 
derives in part from activities of the expert that involve  thinking, feeling  and acting. Often 
experts  speak  of  a  need  to  “get  a  feeling  for  what  you’re  working  on”.  In  fact,  the 
biography  of one  Nobel  Lauriat in  biology (Barbara  McClintock) was entitled, A Feeling 
for  the  Organism  (Keller,  1983).  Nonaka  and  Takeuchi  (1995)  stress  the  importance  of 
capturing  and  using  the  knowledge  of  corporate  expert’s  tacit  knowledge  if  a  company 
wants to become “the knowledge creating company”. 

Most of the  methods used prior to  concept maps consisted of various forms of interviews 
and  analyses  with  experts,  including  case  studies  of  how  experts  accomplished  some 
remarkable  achievement  (Hoffman  et  al.,  1995;  Klein  &  Hoffman,  1992).  In  fact,  these 
methods continue  to  be highly  popular  with many  cognitive  scientists,  most of whom are 
unfamiliar  with Ausubel’s  work  and  the  kind  of  epistemological  ideas on  which  concept 
mapping  is  based.  In  a  review of  the  table  of  contents for  20  recent  books  on  cognitive 
science, not one included “epistemology” in its index. We also used “clinical interviews” in 
our  early   work,  as  noted  above,  but  we  found  it  necessary   to  invent  a  better  way   to 
represent what our  learners knew  and  how  their  knowledge  was  changing  over  time. At 
IHMC,  we  began  using  interviews  to  identify  expert  knowledge  needed  to  interpret 
computer  readings from  computer  outputs of a machine  designed  to  assess problems with 
heart functions,  following  the  injection  of a  bolus of radioactive  solution, and to diagnose 
coronary  dysfunction (Ford  et  al.,  1991;  Ford  et  al.,  1996).  However,  when we  began  to 
concept map  the  expert knowledge of a  cardiologist who literally “wrote the book” on this 
technology, it was evident that there were  concepts missing  in the  map  and  that the  “tacit 
knowledge” of our expert was not fully  expressed in  his book  or  in our interviews. Thus, 
the  concept map not only  allowed us to represent the  expert’s knowledge, but also  to  find 
gaps in the knowledge structure we were procuring through interviews.

While  we  expect  that  interviews,  case  study  analyses,  “critical  incident”  analyses  and 
similar  techniques will  have  value  in  extracting  and  representing  expert  knowledge,  it is 
likely that the  end  product of these  studies might still  be  best represented  in the  form  of 
concept maps,  perhaps with  some  of  the  interview  data  and  other  information  presented 
through icons on maps.

- 29 -

Figure 16. A “Home” concept map for the  knowledge portfolio created by NASA for Mars Exploration.

At IHMC we  continue  to  be  very  active  in the  area  of  capturing  and representing  expert 

Figure 17. An example of a concept map that can be accessed via clicking on one of the resources 

attached to a concept on Figure 16.

- 30 -

knowledge (Coffey  et al., 2002). As the CmapTools software has evolved, it has become an 
increasingly  useful  tool  for  this work, as illustrated  by the  remarkable  resources on Mars 
prepared  at  NASA Ames’  Center  for  Mars  Exploration  (Briggs  et  al.,  2004).  Figure  16 
shows a  “Home” concept map for the  knowledge portfolio that Briggs created and  Figure 
17  shows  one  of  the  many  submaps  he  created.  The  entire  set  of  concept  maps  can  be 
viewed at: http://cmex.ihmc.us. In addition to submaps, a  wide  variety  of digital  resources 
can be  accessed  via  the  concept maps. Many  other projects  are  represented in  the  IHMC 
Public CmapServer accessible through CmapTools, including projects dealing  with weather 
forecasting  (Hoffman  et  al.,  2000,  see:  http://www.ihmc.us/research/projects/StormLK/), 
electronic technicians (Coffey et al., 2003), and Thai fabric crafts. 

Conclusions

In this paper we have tried to present the theoretical foundations and the origins of what we 
call  concept  maps.  While  at  first  glance  concept  maps  may  appear  to  be  just  another 
graphic  representation  of  information,  understanding  the  foundations  for  this  tool  and  its 
proper use will lead the user to see that this is truly  a profound and powerful tool. It  may  at 
first look  like  a  simple  arrangement  of  words into  a  hierarchy,  but when  care  is  used  in 
organizing  the concepts represented by the words, and the propositions or ideas are formed 
with  well-chosen  linking  words,  one  begins  to  see  that  a  good  concept  map is  at  once 
simple,  but also  elegantly complex  with  profound  meanings.  Concept mapping  has been 
shown  to  help  learners  learn,  researchers create  new knowledge,  administrators  to  better 
structure  and  manage  organizations,  writers  to  write,  and  evaluators  assess  learning.  As 
with any tool, it can also be misused, and we have illustrated some examples of this.

We  also wish  to use  this  document  as  a  foundation  for  further  experimentation, critique, 
and dialogue regarding  the use of this tool. The CmapTools web site provides opportunities 
for  lively   exchanges  among  users  and  researchers.  This  document  itself  should  be  a 
“living”  document,  with  revisions  occurring  periodically as  we  gain  new  knowledge  and 
experiences  with  the  use  of  this  tool.  We  invite  all  users  of  concept  mapping  and 
CmapTools to participate in this dialogue.

References

Anderson, O. R. (1992). Some interrelationships between constructivist models of learning 
and current neurobiological theory, with implications for science education. Journal 
of Research in Science Teaching, 19(10), 1037-1058.

Ausubel, D. P. (1963). The psychology of meaningful verbal learning. New York: Grune 

and Stratton.

- 31 -

Ausubel, D. P. (1968). Educational psychology: A cognitive view. New York: Holt, 

Rinehart and Winston.

Ausubel, D. P., Novak, J. D., & Hanesian, H. (1978). Educational psychology: A cognitive 

view (2nd ed.). New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.

Bascones, J., & Novak, J. D. (1985). Alternative instructional systems and the development 

of problem solving skills in physics. European Journal of Science Education, 7(3), 
253-261.

Beirute, L., & Mayorga, L. F. (2004). Los mapas conceptuales herramienta poderosa en la 
resolución alternativa de conflictos. In A. J. Cañas, J. D. Novak & F. M. González 
(Eds.), Concept maps: Theory, methodology, technology. Proceedings of the 1st 
international conference on concept mapping (Vol. I). Pamplona, Spain: 
Universidad Pública de Navarra.

Berk, L.E. & Winsler, A. (1995). Scaffolding Children’s Learning: Vygotsky and early 
 
childhood education. Washington, D.C.: National Association for Education of  
 
Young Children.
Bloom, B. S. (1956). Taxonomy of educational objectives; the classification of educational 

goals (1st ed.). New York: Longmans Green.

Bransford, J., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R. R. (Eds.). (1999). How people learn: Brain, 

mind, experience, and school. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.

Briggs, G., Shamma, D. A., Cañas, A. J., Carff, R., Scargle, J., & Novak, J. D. (2004). 

Concept maps applied to Mars exploration public outreach. In A. J. Cañas, J. D. 
Novak & F. González (Eds.), Concept maps: Theory, methodology, technology. 
Proceedings of the first international conference on concept mapping (Vol. I, pp. 
109-116). Pamplona, Spain: Universidad Pública de Navarra.

Cañas, A. J., Carff, R., Hill, G., Carvalho, M., Arguedas, M., Eskridge, T., et al. (2005). 

Concept maps: Integrating knowledge and information visualization. In S.-O. 
Tergan & T. Keller (Eds.), Knowledge and information visualization: Searching for 
synergies (pp. 205-219). Heidelberg/NY: Springer Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science.

Cañas, A. J., Ford, K. M., Brennan, J., Reichherzer, T., & Hayes, P. (1995). Knowledge 

construction and sharing in quorum. Paper presented at the Seventh World 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education, Washington DC.

Cañas, A. J., Ford, K. M., Novak, J. D., Hayes, P., Reichherzer, T., & Suri, N. (2001). 

Online concept maps: Enhancing collaborative learning by using technology with 
concept maps. The Science Teacher, 68(4), 49-51.

Cañas, A. J., Hill, G., Carff, R., Suri, N., Lott, J., Arroyo, M., et al. (2004a). CmapTools: 

Una rete per modellizare e condividere la conoscenza. In A. Spaziante (Ed.), La 
conoscenza come bene pubblico comune: Software, dati, saperi (pp. 51-62). Torino: 
CIS-Piemonte.

Cañas, A. J., Hill, G., Carff, R., Suri, N., Lott, J., Eskridge, T., et al. (2004b). CmapTools: 
A knowledge modeling and sharing environment. In A. J. Cañas, J. D. Novak & F. 
M. González (Eds.), Concept maps: Theory, methodology, technology. Proceedings 

- 32 -

of the first international conference on concept mapping (Vol. I, pp. 125-133). 
Pamplona, Spain: Universidad Pública de Navarra.

Cañas, A. J., Hill, G., Granados, A., Pérez, C., & Pérez, J. D. (2003a). The network 

architecture of CmapTools (Technical Report No. IHMC CmapTools 2003-01). 
Pensacola, FL: Institute for Human and Machine Cognition.

Cañas, A. J., Hill, G., & Lott, J. (2003b). Support for constructing knowledge models in 
CmapTools (Technical Report No. IHMC CmapTools 2003-02). Pensacola, FL: 
Institute for Human and Machine Cognition.

Cañas, A. J., Hill, G., Lott, J., & Suri, N. (2003c). Permissions and access control in 

CmapTools (Technical Report No. IHMC CmapTools 2003-03). Pensacola, FL: 
Institute for Human and Machine Cognition.

Cañas, A. J., & Novak, J. D. (2005). A concept map-centered learning environment. Paper 

presented at the Symposium at the 11th Biennial Conference of the European 
Association for Research in Learning and Instruction (EARLI), Cyprus.

Carvalho, M. R., Hewett, R., & Cañas, A. J. (2001). Enhancing web searches from concept 
map-based knowledge models. In N. Callaos, F. G. Tinetti, J. M. Champarnaud & J. 
K. Lee (Eds.), Proceedings of SCI 2001: Fifth multiconference on systems, 
cybernetics and informatics (pp. 69-73). Orlando, FL: International Institute of 
Informatics and Systemics.

Coffey, J. W., Cañas, A. J., Reichherzer, T., Hill, G., Suri, N., Carff, R., et al. (2003). 

Knowledge modeling and the creation of el-tech: A performance support system for 
electronic technicians. Expert Systems with Applications, 25(4), 483-492.

Coffey, J. W., Hoffman, R. R., Cañas, A. J., & Ford, K. M. (2002). A concept-map based 

knowledge modeling approach to expert knowledge sharing. In M. Boumedine 
(Ed.), Proceedings of IKS 2002 - the IASTED international conference on 
information and knowledge sharing (pp. 212-217). Calgary, Canada: Acta Press.
Derbentseva, N., Safayeni, F., & Cañas, A. J. (2004). Experiments on the effect of map 

structure and concept quantification during concept map construction. In A. J. 
Cañas, J. D. Novak & F. M. González (Eds.), Concept maps: Theory, methodology, 
technology, proceedings of the first international conference on concept mapping. 
Pamplona, Spain: Universidad Pública de Navarra.

Derbentseva, N., Safayeni, F., & Cañas, A. J. (2006). Concept maps: Experiments on 

dynamic thinking. Journal of Research in Science Teaching 44(3).

Edmondson, K. (2000). Assessing science understanding through concept maps. In J. 

Mintzes, J. Wandersee & J. Novak (Eds.), Assessing science understanding (pp. 
19-40). San Diego: Academic Press.

Edwards, J., & Fraser, K. (1983). Concept maps as reflections of conceptual understanding. 

Research in Science Education, 13, 19-26.

Ford, K. M., Cañas, A. J., Jones, J., Stahl, H., Novak, J. D., & Adams-Webber, J. (1991). 

Iconkat: An integrated constructivist knowledge acquisition tool. Knowledge 
Acquisition, 3, 215-236.

- 33 -

Ford, K. M., Coffey, J. W., Cañas, A. J., Andrews, E. J., & Turner, C. W. (1996). Diagnosis 

and explanation by a nuclear cardiology expert system. International Journal of 
Expert Systems, 9, 499-506.

Gardner, H. (1983). Frames of Mind: The theory of multiple intelligences. New York: Basic 

Books.

Hoffman, B. (1962). The tyranny of testing. New York: Corwell-Collier.
Hoffman, R. R., Coffey, J. W., & Ford, K. M. (2000). A case study in the research 

paradigm of human-centered computing: Local expertise in weather forecasting. 
Report on the contract "Human-centered system prototype". Washington, DC: 
National Technology Alliance.

Hoffman, R. R., Shadbolt, N. R., Buton, A. M., & Klein, G. (1995). Eliciting knowledge 

from experts: A methodological analysis. Organizational Behavior and Human 
Design Processes, 62(2), 129-158.

Holden, C. (1992). Study flunks science and math tests. Science Education, 26, 541.
Johnson, D., Maruyama, G., Johnson, R., Nelson, D., & Skon, L. (1981). The effects of 

cooperative, competitive and individualistic goal structure on achievement: A metaanalysis.
 Psychological Bulletin, 89, 47-62.

Keller, E. F. (1983). A feeling for the organism: The life and work of Barbara McClintock. 

San Francisco: W.H. Freeman.

Kirschner, P.A., Sweller, J. & Clark, R. E. (2006). Why minimal guidance during 

instruction does not work: an analysis of the failure of constructivist, discovery, 
problem-based, experiential, and inquiry-based teaching. Educational Psychologist, 
41(2), 75-86. 

Klein, G., & Hoffman, R. R. (1992). Seeing the invisible: Perceptual-cognitive aspects of 

expertise. In M. Robinowitz (Ed.), Cognitive science foundations of instruction (pp. 
203-226). Mawah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Leake, D. B., Maguitman, A., Reichherzer, T., Cañas, A. J., Carvalho, M., Arguedas, M., et 

al. (2004). Googling from a concept map: Towards automatic concept-map-based 
query formation. In A. J. Cañas, J. D. Novak & F. M. González (Eds.), Concept 
maps: Theory, methodology, technology. Proceedings of the first international 
conference on concept mapping (Vol. I, pp. 409-416). Pamplona, Spain: 
Universidad Pública de Navarra.

Macnamara, J. (1982). Names for things: A study of human learning. Cambridge, MA: 

M.I.T. Press.

Mayer, R. E. (2004). Should There Be a Three-Strikes Rule Against Pure Discovery 
(cid:1)
(cid:1)
Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits on our 

Learning? The Case for Guided Methods of Instruction. American Psychologist, 
59(1), 14-19. 

capacity for processing information. Psychological Review, 63, 81-97.
Mintzes, J. J., Wandersee, J. H., & Novak, J. D. (1998). Teaching science for 

understanding: A human constructivist view. San Diego: Academic Press.

Mintzes, J. J., Wandersee, J. H., & Novak, J. D. (2000). Assessing science understanding: 

A human constructivist view. San Diego: Academic Press.

- 34 -

Nickerson, R. S. & Adams, M. J. (1997). Long-term memory for a common object. 

Cognitive Psychology, 11, 287-307.

Nonaka, I., & Takeuchi, H. (1995). The knowledge-creating company: How Japanese 

companies create the dynamics of innovation. New York: Oxford University Press.

Novak, J. D. (1977). A theory of education. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Novak, J. D. (1990). Concept maps and vee diagrams: Two metacognitive tools for science 

and mathematics education. Instructional Science, 19, 29-52.

Novak, J. D. (1991). Clarify with concept maps: A tool for students and teachers alike. The 

Science Teacher, 58, 45-49.

Novak, J. D. (1993). Human constructivism: A unification of psychological and 

epistemological phenomena in meaning making. International Journal of Personal 
Construct Psychology, 6, 167-193.

Novak, J. D. (1998). Learning, creating, and using knowledge: Concept maps as 

facilitative tools in schools and corporations. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates.

Novak, J. D. (2002). Meaningful learning: The essential factor for conceptual change in 

limited or appropriate propositional hierarchies (liphs) leading to empowerment of 
learners. Science Education, 86(4), 548-571.

Novak, J. D., & Gowin, D. B. (1984). Learning how to learn. New York, NY: Cambridge 

University Press.

Novak, J. D., & Musonda, D. (1991). A twelve-year longitudinal study of science concept 

learning. American Educational Research Journal, 28(1), 117-153.

Novak, J. D., & Wandersee, J. (1991). Coeditors, special issue on concept mapping. 

Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 28(10).

O'Donnell, A., Dansereau, D., & Hall, R. H. (2002). Knowledge maps as scaffolds for 

cognitive processing. Educational Psychology Review, 14, 71-86.

Penfield, W. & Perot, P. (1963) The Brain’s Record of Auditory and Visual Experience: A 

final Summary and Discussion. Brain, 86, 595-697.

Preszler, R. W. (2004). Cooperative concept mapping improves performance in biology. 

Journal of College Science Teaching, 33, 30-35.

Schneps, M. (1989). Private universe project: Harvard University.
Shepard, R. N. (1967). Recognition memory for words, sentences, and pictures. Journal of 

Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 6, 156-163.

Monographs: General and Applied, 74(11), 1-30.

Sperling, G. (1960). The information available in brief visual presentations. Psychological
 
Sperling, G. (1963). A model for visual memory tasks. Human Factors, 5, 19-31.
Sweller, J., Kirschner, P.A. & Clark, R.E. (2007). Why Minimally Guided Teaching 
 
 
Tsien, J. Z. (2007). The Memory. Scientific American, July, 52-59.
Valittuti, G. (2004). Personal communication.
Vitale, M. R., & Romance, N. R. (2000). Portfolios in science assessment: A knowledgeTechniques 
Do Not Work: A Reply to Commentaries.  Educational Psychcologist, 
42(2). 115-121. 

based model for classroom practice. In J. J. Mintzes, J. H. Wandersee & J. D. 

- 35 -

Novak (Eds.), Assessing science understanding: A human constructivist view. San 
Diego, CA: Academic Press.

Vygotsky, L., & Cole, M. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher 

psychological processes. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

- 36 -

