Flying Real-Time Network for Disaster

Assistance

Rodrigo M. Santos1(B), Javier Orozco1, Daniel Mosse2, Vinicius Petrucci3,

Sergio F. Ochoa4, and Roc Meseguer5

1 Dpto. de Ing. El´ectrica y de Computadoras, UNS - IIIE, CONICET,

Bah´ıa Blanca, Argentina

ierms@criba.edu.ar

2 University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, USA

3 Universidade Federal da Bahia, Salvador, Bahia, Brazil

4 Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile

5 Universitat Polit`ecnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain

Abstract. Landslides and large ﬂoods are serious natural disasters that
every year cause multiple deaths and loss in property around the world.
When these events occur in areas like the “favelas” or mountain regions
in coastal cities like Rio de Janeiro, the situation becomes critical as
buildings and infrastructures are not prepared to withstand them. Search
and rescue teams in such disaster areas need to rely on real-time communication,
 which often cannot be adequately provided by cell or radio
networks. In this paper, we argue that ﬂying ad-hoc networks can provide 
the support needed in these scenarios and propose a new solution
towards that goal, termed Flying Witness Units. We make our case by
presenting real-time schedulability analysis of message delivery for a disaster 
scenario.

Keywords: UAVs· FANET· Real-time · Schedulability· Disaster management


1 Introduction

Every year natural disasters hit urban areas and produce dramatic losses in terms
of both, human life and damage to property. The more destructive incidents
(earthquakes, ﬂash-ﬂoods, tsunamis and landslides) are characterized by their
sudden development without previous alert, while some natural disasters can be
detected earlier. In any case, once the incident happens, there are only a few
hours to rescue survivors. This period is called the golden relief time and lasts
up to 72 h [11]. Communication becomes the bottleneck for the search and rescue
(SAR) teams dealing with the disaster and they have real-time characteristics
and need to be reliable.

In 2011, in Rio de Janeiro, a large ﬂood and landslides took place and almost
nine hundred people died, more than one thousand were injured, more than ten
thousand lost their houses and almost a hundred are still missed, according to
c(cid:2) Springer International Publishing AG 2017
S.F. Ochoa et al. (Eds.): UCAmI 2017, LNCS 10586, pp. 591–602, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-67585-5_58

592

R.M. Santos et al.

Rio de Janeiro State Civil Defense reports [18]. At that time, SAR teams were
deployed in the area and, as with all such emergency incidents, SAR teams used
both VHF and UHF radios as the primary means of communications, depending 
on local legislation. This has two main problems. First, such radios are not
reliable given that there is no way to ensure that the message has been received
properly or even that it has reached the destination. Second, it only transmits
voice and no digital data such as maps/images. In some cases, the lack of information 
leads to critical decisions to be taken based on wrong information, as in
the Yarnell Hill wild ﬁre where 19 ﬁremen were trapped by the ﬁre and died.

In previous work, we have previously proposed the utilization of special
devices named witness units (WUs) to provide support after a tsunami alert
or event, helping move people to shelters, predeﬁned according to Local Contingency 
Plans, where the wave will not reach. WUs are used to inform community
leaders and passers of the best routes to the shelters [16]. WUs can be attached
to street light poles (or other static resilient locations) and are connected to the
disaster management center through a satellite network. WUs rely on standard
Wi-Fi and provide access points (APs) for the human users. However, these units
do not move, they are placed in ﬁxed locations before the event occurs.

To adapt the network to unknown and dynamic environments, the concept
of mules was previously introduced [14] to provide real-time guarantees to the
message delivery between the SAR teams and the incident commander (IC) in
the command post (CP). In this case, the members of each SAR team (including 
the leader) build a local ad-hoc network where the SAR leader is in charge
of acting as gateway to the CP. Since there may be several hundred meters or
even kilometers between a SAR team and the IC, a direct connection is typically 
not feasible. Thus, mules can be implemented with unmanned or manned
vehicles that physically transport the information in digital format. Mules can
move among all the diﬀerent SAR teams exchanging (collecting and delivering)
messages. It is possible to deployed in certain places nodes to act as bridges
between two otherwise disconnected areas.

In this paper, we introduce the idea of deploying a network of ﬂying witness
units (or FWUs) through the use of UAVs or drones. In [5] drones or UAV are
deﬁned as any aircraft that is operated without the possibility of direct human
intervention from within or on the aircraft. Drones come in many diﬀerent sizes
and shapes and are designed to primarily collect data to meet a multitude of
diﬀerent tasks and applications. The lack of an onboard pilot means drones exist
in a variety of sizes, from microUAVs that can be held in the palm of your hand
to large aircraft and airships that rival the size and power of traditional piloted
craft. Drone models include ﬁxed-wing aircraft, rotary-wing, tilt-rotor, ducted
fan, and even airships. This variety of sizes and forms oﬀers a dizzying array of
options for organizations involved with disaster mitigation and relief.

The UAVs will act as mules and/or bridges to provide the required connectivity.
 The whole network can be seen as a FANET (Flying Ad-Hoc Network) [1].
While there have been recent eﬀorts investigating FANETs, it remains a great
challenge to design and deploy eﬃcient network architectures comprised of UAVs.

Flying Real-Time Network for Disaster Assistance

593

Such deployed networks need to address the real-time behavior and feasibility
analysis to meet timeliness of message delivery. The use of drones must be coordinated 
with Air Operations oﬃce as the Incident Command System (ICS) doctrine 
adopted by most First Response Agencies include the aerial support, so
ﬂight safety rules should be followed.
Contribution: This paper presents three contributions. The ﬁrst one is the extension 
of the witness units to Flying Witness Units with capacity to store-andforward 
information between SAR teams and IC. The second contribution is the
computation of real-time feasibility conditions for this kind of networks where
there is no end-to-end path available continuously. The analysis is done at the
network layer. Finally, indications on the network deployment and how nodes
should be distributed to have a predictable behavior in messages transmissions
are presented.
Organization: The rest of the paper is organized in the following way. There is a
large amount of bibliography about drones and their use for disaster relief and
rescue support, in Sect. 2 some of the most important papers are commented.
In Sect. 3 the system proposal is presented and the transmission model used is
introduced. We also discuss the network deployment issue. In Sect. 4, the realtime 
model is presented for computing the feasibility conditions. Algorithms are
presented and a brief example is developed. In Sect. 5 the proposal is discussed
considering real constraints and ﬁnally in Sect. 6, conclusions are drawn.

2 Related Work

Previous research works have considered some kind of alternative/opportunistic
networks for disaster assistance. A human-centric wireless sensor network was
introduced in [11] to improve communication and coordination of critical information 
during search and rescue activities. While the added layer of human sensors 
can help input extra information into the network, the underlying deployed
network is still necessary and an essential key to the success of the communication.
In [10] the authors proposed a human-centric approach to model IoT based
solutions for man made incidents like train derailments, terrorist attacks in public
places. The idea is in line with what is proposed in this paper although in the
reference paper, the SAR teams used a MANET as the network paradigm.

The design of a Witness Unit (WU) device was proposed in [16] to provide
rescuers with the necessary communication in an emergency area. A WU can use
a satellite network for remotely connecting the rescuers to emergency command
centers. A WU is statically placed ahead of time in a safe and suitable place
to fully cover a determined rescue area, which limits this type of networks to
known disaster locations (too expensive for scalability). While the proposal in
[16] is attractive because of its simple architecture, a potential shortcoming is
that WUs are site-speciﬁc and need to be statically placed in some predeﬁned
areas. This would require a priori knowledge regarding likely disasters in those
areas and would demand network deployment eﬀorts ahead of time.

594

R.M. Santos et al.

In [2] the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Glenn
Research Center, presents the Unmanned Aircraft System (UAS) to select and
test a communication technology for the UAS Control and Non-Payload Communications 
(CNPC) link. The authors evaluate the performance of several potential
technologies for the CNPC link through detailed software simulations resulting
LTE and 802.16 ranked as the top two.

The SMAVNET (Swarming Micro Air Vehicle Network) project at EPFL
introduces a ﬂying ad-hoc self-organizing network that uses swarming communication 
protocols to build an alternative wireless network for rescuers in emergency 
scenarios. They propose a kind of self-organizing mesh network, where the
UAVs rely on multi-hop communications to better cover the operation area [8].
The full deployment of FANETs at large scale may be too intricate for the
scenarios we are considering, given that it would require dealing with non-trivial
decisions such as dynamic routing [12].

In [3] the authors claims that to date, there have been no practical solutions
outside military applications, to immediately assist emergency disaster relief
communication. In consequence, they propose an autonomous system to deploy
UAV as the ﬁrst phase disaster recovery communication network for wide-area
relief. An automation algorithm control the deployment and positioning of a
set of quadcopter UAVs based on a hexagonal pattern distribution using an
open source MAVLink point-to-point communication protocol. The distributed
execution of the algorithm is based on a centralized management of UAV cells
through assigning the role of supernodes to some speciﬁc UAVs. The use of opensource 
solutions makes the system easily reproducible and accessible but, at the
same time expose it to several ways of network attacks that require extensive
protocol modiﬁcations and adds [9].

In this paper we propose a ﬂying real-time ad-hoc network to provide support
to SAR teams in disaster relief scenarios. We introduce a feasibility analysis
based on the demand bound function and dividing the message propagation in
diﬀerent stages each one with a computed release time and deadline. To the best
of the authors knowledge, this kind of analysis have not been done before for
ad-hoc networks and particularly in the case of FANETs.

3 Proposed Network System

We argue that UAVs have several advantages as an alternative network system
in a disaster environment. For example, UAV technology can reduce the risk
assumed by a rescue crew and enhance its eﬀectiveness while providing viewing 
angles that are impossible to obtain with other types of mules. The cost of
UVAs is falling and their technological capabilities are increasing rapidly includ-
ing: automated obstacle avoidance, route planning, point-to-point navigation
using way-points and tracking points of interest. All these features facilitates
and autonomous deployment of the network to provide the necessary connectivity 
among the diﬀerent SAR teams.

UAVs may become the primary form of transportation for support technologies 
in disaster scenarios. Mostly used for video surveillance, in these cases UAVs

Flying Real-Time Network for Disaster Assistance

595

equipped with data communication and software capabilities can share data in a
collaborative architecture building an eﬃcient FANET. They hold a great potential 
when their collected data is integrated to an existing geographic information
system (GIS) and a crisis management protocol. As explained in Sect. 1, drones
may have diﬀerent sizes and ﬂight autonomy. A proper distribution of them is
necessary to provide the best network coverage in the disaster area and support
the relief and rescue activities.

3.1 Flying Witness Units (FWU)

A FWU physically stores and transfers data from one location to another or
eventually transmits the data to another FWU acting as bridge linking disconnected 
areas. Thus, a FWU needs to have enough computation power and
lifetime to provide an access point to SAR teams, while acting as gateways to
the IC in charge of the SAR operation. There are basically two kinds of FWU.
The ﬁrst one is used to support in direct contact the SAR team. In this case,
each team counts with a dedicated FWU that follows it and is used as gateway
to the challenged network. Although basically tied to the SAR team, the drone
may move around to get full contact with the second group of FWU.

Figure 1 shows a possible deployment of the FWUs, implemented by UAVs.
In the ﬁgure, the cell phones represent SAR team members, who communicate
with the FWUs, that in turn communicate with other FWUs in the FANET,
that deliver the message to the IC. An added value of the FANET is that, in
addition to SAR teams, survivors will also have access to the network. In the
case of survivors, the access to the network is limited to “listeners” so they
can receive directives on how to proceed or in case of allowing the transmission
of data, it will be through a special application so important information can
be sent to the command post. In that case, survivors can receive information
and eventually indicate their presence in the way of a very short identiﬁcation
message through the WiFi connection.

Fig. 1. Deployment of WU and two mobile UAV mules (aka FWU); SAR members
are depicted by smartphones.

596

R.M. Santos et al.

We envision the FWUs landing at certain spots (for more extensive message
exchange, for dropping a WU dynamically, or simply for saving energy) and
ﬂying again following the movements of the SAR team. We also envision the
FWUs being remotely controlled to start with, specially those carrying WUs to
be deployed near SAR teams. Thereafter, truly autonomous behavior is the goal.

3.2 Network Deployment

Network deployment is a key issue in emergency situations. The communication
network cannot be set-up ahead of time for two main reasons. First, some natural
disasters (such as landslides) typically destroy most structures (mudslides also
cover almost everything with mud). Second, it is not clear where one should
deploy the new communications network ahead of time, given that it is impossible
to predict where the disaster will occur1. Once the incident has taken place, the
IC decides where the SAR teams should be deployed ﬁrst to start the disaster
relief activities and with each team a FWU is also deployed. These FWU will
probably not been enough to cover the transmission range between the teams
and the IC. Additional FWU should be used then in the form of bridges or mules
to Only once the incident has taken place, are the proper locations to deploy the
FWUs selected by the IC in the CP.

The network system proposed in this work is based on a FANET which is
built with the FWUs that are associated to the SAR teams and those operating
as mules and/or bridges. The communication between the SAR teams and the
CP is performed in a hierarchical way. In the lowest level, the members of the
SAR team transmit information to the closest FWU acting as gateway to the
FANET.

The FANET is, from its operating point of view, an opportunistic network
in which there is no stable path between any pair of nodes in the system [1].
In an emergency scenario, real-time messages have to be delivered before their
deadlines [15] to be useful. For this to occur, it is necessary to have bounded end-
to-end transmission delays so the worst-case can be compared with the deadline
to verify the feasibility of the real-time operation. The challenge in this case
is that the network delay cannot be determined beforehand as the topology is
variable and there are variable physical constraints. This is typical schedulability
analysis of real-time systems; our contribution is to extend this analysis for the
case of opportunistic mixed networks, composed of mobile nodes, semi-ﬁxed or
ﬁxed FWUs and an IC. This is what we call a Flying Real-Time Network, FRTN,
as shown in Fig. 2.

4 Real-Time Analysis

We consider a set of periodic and independent messages sent by the nodes (SAR
teams); for simplicity of presentation all messages have the same length, that

1 There are exceptions, of course, such as a tsunami detection and warning systems

in any town that is to be protected.

Flying Real-Time Network for Disaster Assistance

597

is, they have equal payloads. Formally, a message mi originating in node i is
described by the tuple (cid:2)C, P, r, D(cid:3), where C is the time required to transmit a
message, P is the period, r is the release time, and D is the relative deadline.
The absolute deadline is computed from the release time and relative deadline,
d = r + D. For simplicity, we consider the time is divided in atomic units or
slots. Events occur at the beginning of a slot. Time is noted t = 0, 1, . . . , n.

Fig. 2. Proposed network topology

Fig. 3. Message propagation pipeline

The proposed network has a tree structure with nodes exchanging messages
with the FWU. The FWU interacts with the FRTN that is connected with the
IC. Figure 2 shows a graph representing the network. Messages are generated
in nodes and go through levels before reaching the IC. In the reverser path, a
message sent by the IC should traverse the same levels to reach a SAR team.
The transmission path can be seen as a “pipeline” where each stage/level can
not process the message until it has been released by the previous one.

Figure 3 shows the propagation model for a message. Each stage in the transmission 
process requires a proper scheduling algorithm and for each level the
real-time feasibility conditions should be veriﬁed for the system. Described in
this way, we have to consider the moment in which the message arrives to intermediate 
nodes and the latest instant at which it should leave that node. Suppose
there is one hop between the source and destination node. A message has a total
delay of x slots if it is transmitted alone in the network and as soon as it arrives
to the intermediate hop it is sent again. Suppose that the delay from the source
to the intermediate node is y slots. If the message is release at r = 0, it is not
possible for that message to arrive before r = 0+y to the intermediate node. The
message should not leave the intermediate node after D− x− y in order to arrive
before its deadline to the destination node. In this way, the message should be
processed in the intermediate node in at most D − x − y − r. We introduce the
following notation to deal with the schedulability analysis in the intermediate
nodes. For intermediate node j the release time of message i coming from node
i is noted rj

i and the transmission time is noted C j
i .

i , the deadline is noted Dj

There are several scheduling algorithms. Among the most used we can mention 
Rate Monotonic (RM) and Earliest Deadline First (EDF). In the ﬁrst case,

598

R.M. Santos et al.

priorities are assigned to messages based on the period, with shorter periods
higher priorities. At each opportunity, the message with higher priority is dispatched.
 In the second case, the highest priority is given to the message with
the closer deadline. In that way, whenever the node has the chance to transmit,
it dispatches the message with the closest deadline. EDF can reach better utilization 
of the network. Even though a diﬀerent policy can be employed at each
hop in the path, for simplicity, we assume an EDF scheduling policy for all the
stages.

For modifying the release times:
1. For any initial node of the precedence graph, set r∗
2. Select a message mj

i such that its release time has not

i = ri.

been modified but the release times of all immediate
predecessors mh
exists, exit.

i have been modified. If no such message

3. Set rj
4. Return to step 2

i = max[ri, max(rh

i + C : mh

i ≺ mj

i )].

Algorithm 1. Chetto Algorithm for modifying release times

For modifying the deadlines:
1. For any terminal node of the precedence graph, set d∗
2. Select a message mi such that its deadline has not been

i = di

modified but the deadlines of all immediate successors mk
have been modified. If no such message exists, exit.

3. Set dj
4. Return to step 2

i = min[di, min(dk

i − C : mj ≺ mk)].

Algorithm 2. Chetto Algorithm for modifying deadlines

EDF is optimal for scheduling a set of independent periodic messages within
a network. However, in the problem proposed here, the message should traverse
several hops before reaching destination and in each hop, a scheduling policy is
followed. This aﬀects the independent condition as a message can not be dispatched 
from node j if it has not leave node i before. Thus, there is a dependency
in the scheduling conditions of node j with respect to the scheduling conditions
in node i. To overcome this problem, we adopt the Chetto algorithm [4] that
transforms a set of precedence related messages in a set of independent ones. In
this way, a message with one hop is transformed in two independent messages
being sent by two nodes but with release and deadlines modiﬁed for each one of
them. In this way, message mi going through node j to node k is seen as two
independent messages: mi
i that have equal transmission time but diﬀerent 
release times and deadlines. To accomplish this decoupling of the precedence
relations, Chetto modiﬁes the release times beginning from the ﬁrst stage and the
deadlines starting with the last one. Algorithms 1 and 2, present in pseudo-code
the algorithms for modifying the release and deadlines respectively.

i and mj

Flying Real-Time Network for Disaster Assistance

599

In our proposal, some drones are used as bridges so they are in a ﬁx location
while others actually transport the messages between two nodes. This, introduces
a delay that is not related with the transmission rate or computation power of the
processor but with the time needed by the UAV to transport the data between
nodes i and j, Δtij. This delay can be considered constant and equal for every
message between those two nodes. However, this delay aﬀects the end-to-end
transmission time and should be taken into account. The transport delay has to
be subtracted from the deadline computed for that stage.

dj
i = dj

i − Δtij

(1)

Once the message transmission has been broken into diﬀerent stages, the
real-time feasibility test can be performed in each node of the “pipeline”. To do
this we use the demand bound function, dbf(t1, t2), introduced in [17]. This test
computes the worst-case work demand and compares it to the time available in
the system for message transmissions. For each stage or intermediate node Si, if
the available time is greater than the messages demand, the system is feasible.
We formalize the deﬁnition for the dbf function in the interval [t0, t1] based
on [17] in the following way:

Deﬁnition 1. The demand function for stage Si, denoted by dbfi(t0, t1), is the
total time taken by all the instances of the messages going through Si, having
release time and deadline within [t0, t1]. For periodic messages, the demand function 
can be computed as follows:

dbfi(t0, t1)

def
= max(0,

(cid:3)(cid:4)

(cid:2)

mi
h

∈Si

t1 − di
Ph

h

(cid:5)

(cid:6)

−

t0 − ri
Ph

h

(cid:7)

(cid:8)

+ 1

C)

(2)

h represents the modiﬁed deadline in stage j by Chetto algorithm and

For any interval of length t, the dbf(t0, t0 + t) is deﬁned as the maximum

possible demand in any interval of length t [17]:

where di
Eq. 1.

system.

dbf(t) def= max
t0

dbf(t0, t0 + t)

(3)

Finally, we introduce the necessary and suﬃcient feasibility condition for the

∀Si,∀tdbfSi(t) ≤ t

(4)

4.1 Computing the Condition

In the this example we show how the real-time condition is computed. Suppose a
network is deployed after a landslide. Three diﬀerent SAR teams are deployed in
the area. Each team has 10 members and one FWU that acts as gateway to the
FRTN, which is composed of a set of FWUs acting as mules for providing connectivity 
among teams and the IC. Each node within the SAR team generates
a message report and sends it to the IC every ﬁve minutes. These messages are

600

R.M. Santos et al.

forwarded by the gateway to the FRTN as soon as possible. Assume that each
message contains 250 KB (or 2 Mb) of data, voice or pictures, and the transmission 
link with the FWU is a 1 Mb/s wireless link. We assume the messages have a
simultaneous release at instant zero. With this condition, each message requires
2 s to be transferred from the node to the FWU. With 10 nodes operating with a
round robin scheme, the FWU receives all the messages within 20 s. In this case,
ri0 = 0 for all mi. Each message has two hops to reach the CP and an absolute
deadline of 600 s. Let’s suppose the ﬂying time of the mules in the FRTN is 360 s.
In the worst case, the ﬂying mule require 60 s to deliver to the IC the 30 messages
collected from the FWU associated to the SAR teams. With these constraints, the
available time for transmission is just 180 s. Applying algorithms 2 and 1 to each
message we have 180 s for the last relative deadline and 160 s for the ﬁrst one.

)
f
b
d
(
 
d
n
a
m
e
D
U
W
F

 

1600

1400

1200

1000

800

600

400

200

0
0

200

400

600

800

Time (slots)

1000

1200

1400

1600

)
f
b
d
(
 
d
n
a
m
e
D
N
T
R
F

 

1600

1400

1200

1000

800

600

400

200

0
0

200

400

600

800

Time (slots)

1000

1200

1400

1600

Fig. 4. FWU 10 messages. Notes: dbf
in black and t bound in red. (Color
ﬁgure online)

Fig. 5. FRTN 30 messages. Notes: dbf
in black and t bound in red. (Color
ﬁgure online)

)
f
b
d
(
 
d
n
a
m
e
D
U
W
F

 

1600

1400

1200

1000

800

600

400

200

0
0

200

400

600

800

Time (slots)

1000

1200

1400

1600

)
f
b
d
(
 
d
n
a
m
e
D
N
T
R
F

 

1600

1400

1200

1000

800

600

400

200

0
0

200

400

600

800

Time (slots)

1000

1200

1400

1600

Fig. 6. FWU 30 messages. Notes: dbf
in black and t bound in red. (Color
ﬁgure online)

Fig. 7. FRTN 90 messages. Notes: dbf
in black and t bound in red. (Color
ﬁgure online)

Figures 4 and 5 present the dbf in the FWU and the FRTN respectively. In
both cases, the load is quite light and more traﬃc is possible. Figures 6 and 7
show the dbf in both hops when the number of messages being forwarded are
tripled and it shows that the system is still feasible. With all these considerations,
the system still works within the real-time parameters proposed.

The previous example presents a very simple case with just a few elements in
the network. When the FRTN is larger and the message has several hops before
reaching the destination, additional problems like routing appear and should be
considered at the moment of doing the real-time analysis.

Flying Real-Time Network for Disaster Assistance

601

5 Discussion

The network system proposed in this work is ﬂexible and general enough to
be applicable to support SAR activities in several natural disasters, such as
landslides, ﬂoods, or earthquakes. The use of UAVs opens up the possibility
of dynamically deploying a data network (FRTN) with the needed coverage in
these disaster areas. The deployment of the FRTN with FWUs will depend on
the characteristics of the disaster and the geographic features of the region.

There are several trade-oﬀs to consider depending on the operational areas of
each FWU responsible for storing and carrying data from one location to another.
The problem of determining the best route design to deploy and position the
FWUs is an open research question. One critical issue is that of variable data
rate in wireless communication. The communication rate is much higher (up to
54 Mbit/s in 802.11g) when the FWUs are closer to each other, and much lower
when the FWUs are far away (even lower than 1 Mbit/s in 802.11g) [13].

A FWU with a buﬀer of tens of megabytes ﬂying at a speed of few tens of
meters per second could deliver a network bandwidth over 1 Mbps, whereas a
wireless direct link within a distance of few kilometers could deliver a much slower
rate of a few tens of Kbps [6]. However, direct links can deliver a single message
with low latency while a FWU may require a few minutes. The understanding
of these trade-oﬀs is key to beneﬁt from the FWU network deployment [7].

We note that the FWUs should be deployed in such a way that the speciﬁc
areas are covered with a satisfactory periodicity so as to eﬀectively transfer
the information from the SAR teams towards the CP. Real-time delivery of
the messages can be best accomplished in cases where FWUs can work upon
controlled mobility and predeﬁned trajectories.

6 Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper we argue for the use of UAVs as a future network to provide communication 
support for SAR activities in situations of natural disasters, such as
ﬂood and landslides. For that, we designed a mixed ﬂying ad-hoc network with
teams of rescuers, witness units, and ﬂying witness units (mobile and portable,
even by a SAR Unit) to transmit messages from the ﬁeld to the incident commander.
 We also provided an analysis to prove real-time guarantees on message
transmissions in our proposed network. We show that real-time requirements can
be met by decomposing the message delivery in multiple independent stages.

The next step in this research is to consider the message routing within the
FRTN when a whole switching network is deployed to collect the information.
This requires an important amount of UAV to provide the necessary connectivity
and to reduce the amount of mules. The real-time analysis should include in that
case congestion and energy considerations.

Acknowledgments. This work was partially supported by the Spanish government
(TIN2016-77836-C2-2-R).

602

R.M. Santos et al.

References

1. Bekmezci, ˙I., Sahingoz, O.K., Temel, S¸.: Flying ad-hoc networks (fanets): A survey.

Ad Hoc Netw. 11(3), 1254–1270 (2013)

2. Bretmersky, S.C., Bishop, W.D., Dailey, J.E., Chevalier, C.T.: Communications
technology assessment for the unmanned aircraft system (UAS) control and nonpayload 
communications (CNPC) link. Technical report, NASA (2014)

3. Bupe, P., Haddad, R., Rios-Gutierrez, F.: Relief and emergency communication
network based on an autonomous decentralized UAV clustering network. In: SoutheastCon,
 pp. 1–8 (2015)

4. Chetto, H., Chetto, M.: Some results of the earliest deadline scheduling algorithm.

IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. 15(10), 1261–1269 (1989)

5. Cross, A.R.: Drones for disaster response and relief operations. Technical report

Red Cross (2015). http://www.issuelab.org/resources/21683/21683.pdf

6. Frew, E.W., Brown, T.X.: Networking issues for small unmanned aircraft systems.

J. Intell. Robot. Syst. 54(1–3), 21–37 (2009)

7. Henkel, D., Brown, T.X.: On controlled node mobility in delaytolerant networks of
unmanned aerial vehicles. In: International Symposium on Advance Radio Technolgoies 
(ISART), pp. 7–9 (2006)

8. Jimenez-Pacheco, A., Bouhired, D., Gasser, Y., Zuﬀerey, J.C., Floreano, D.,
Rimoldi, B.: Implementation of a wireless mesh network of ultra light mavs with
dynamic routing. In: IEEE Globecom Workshops, pp. 1591–1596 (2012)

9. Marty, J.A.: Vulnerability analysis of the mavlink protocol for command and control 
of unmanned aircraft. Technical report, DTIC Document (2013)

10. Monares, ´A., Ochoa, S.F., Santos, R., Orozco, J., Meseguer, R.: Modeling IoTbased 
solutions using human-centric wireless sensor networks. Sensors 14(9),
15687–15713 (2014)

11. Ochoa, S.F., Santos, R.: Human-centric wireless sensor networks to improve information 
availability during urban search and rescue activities. Inf. Fus. 22, 71–84
(2015)

12. Rosati, S., Kru˙zelecki, K., Heitz, G., Floreano, D., Rimoldi, B.: Dynamic routing for
ﬂying Ad hoc networks. IEEE Trans. Vehicular Technol. 65(3), 1690–1700 (2016)
13. Sahingoz, O.K.: Networking models in ﬂying Ad-hoc networks (fanets): Concepts

and challenges. J. Intell. Robot. Syst. 74(1), 513–527 (2014)

14. Santos, R., Orozco, J., Ochoa, S., Meseguer, R., Mosse, D.: Supporting real-time
message delivery in disaster relief eﬀorts: an analytical approach. University of
Pittsburgh, Technical report (2016)

15. Santos, R., Urriza, J., Santos, J., Orozco, J.: New methods for redistributing
slack time in real-time systems: Applications and comparative evaluations. J. Syst.
Softw. 69(1–2), 115–128 (2004)

16. Santos, R., Mosse, D., Znati, T., Comfort, L.: Design and implementation of a
witness unit for opportunistic routing in tsunami alert scenarios. Saf. Sci. 90, 75–
83 (2016)

17. Serreli, N., Lipari, G., Bini, E.: The demand bound function interface of distributed
sporadic pipelines of tasks scheduled by edf. In: Euromicro Conference on RealTime 
Systems (ECRTS), pp. 187–196 (2010)

18. Toro, J., de Moura, F.S., Pedroso, F.F., Marques, F.: Avaliacao de perdas e danos:
Inundacoes e deslizamentos na regiao serrana do rio de janeiro. Technical report,
World Bank (2012)

