Introducing Ambient Assisted Living

Technology at the Home of the Elderly:

Challenges and Lessons Learned

Diego Muñoz, Francisco J. Gutierrez(&), and Sergio F. Ochoa

Computer Science Department, University of Chile,

Beauchef 851, 3rd Floor, Santiago, Chile

{dimunoz,frgutier,sochoa}@dcc.uchile.cl

Abstract. The promise of pervasive computing applications is to surround
people with affordable,
transparent and unobtrusive technology. However,
several barriers including usability concerns, a lack of perceived usefulness, and
low technology self-efﬁcacy may jeopardize the successful adoption of ambient
assisted living (AAL) systems, particularly by the elderly. Following the
development of the SocialConnector system, which mediates and coordinates
the communication effort of family members with their elders,
this paper
describes the iterative design process conducted to help improve the acceptance
of the system by end-users. This process considered the implicit and explicit
concerns and expectations of the intended target users, and it involved three
improvement cycles along an action research approach. Through this process,
we obtained a set of lessons learned that aim to describe how to unobtrusively
introduce sensing and monitoring technology at
the home of the elderly.
Keeping simple yet meaningful interaction metaphors helps increase the learnability 
and perceived usefulness of AAL technology by the elderly.If older
adults perceive the value of having such kinds of tools installed in their homes,
then they are prone to assume them as part of their lives. Likewise, situational
and activity awareness mechanisms, such as visual notiﬁcation badges and
audio-enhanced user interfaces, can be used to persuade the elderly to approach
the system and eventually use it. Finally, the design of AAL solutions also
requires active consideration of the needs and attitudes of other family members,
particularly those who assume an active role in the caring process of their elders.

Keywords: Elderly  Technology acceptance  Appropriation  Design implications 
 Ambient assisted living

1 Introduction

Over the last few years we have seen the instrumentation of people and environments
with several purposes; for instance, to improve the service provision to passersby,
monitor the health condition of people, or detect particular situations (e.g., ﬁres, robbery,
 or falls) in a certain area. Most services require the placement of some kind of
sensor, either on a person or in the environment, to get the required information to
effectively provide such a service. Following this idea, pervasive computing systems

© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
I. Cleland et al. (Eds.): IWAAL 2015, LNCS 9455, pp. 125–136, 2015.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-26410-3_12

126

D. Muñoz et al.

try to embed these sensors in the environment as much as possible, in an unobtrusive
manner for its end-users.

Most people do not have problems with such an instrumentation process, particularly 
those who use and actively recognize the beneﬁts of mobile and ubiquitous
technology. However, digital illiterate people (e.g., most older adults) usually do not
feel comfortable wearing sensors or seeing their homes instrumented with obtrusive
sensors. Therefore, embedding these devices in the immediate surroundings of the
elderly, or making the latter wear these sensors, represents a challenge for designers of
these types of solutions.

Particularly, older adults have been under the spotlight over recent years, due to the
large variety of opportunities that technology provides, not only for their own monitoring 
but also to assist and improve their quality of life. Nevertheless, the question of
how to deploy sensors where they are required, without stressing and disrupting the
elderly, still remains open. Even if some approaches grounded in the efforts of the
pervasive computing and HCI communities may provide several interacting alternatives 
to deal with the described situation (e.g., a smart TV equipped with a Kinect
camera, or monitoring systems relying on the lectures provided by hidden RFID tags),
a general solution still depends on the type of sensor that needs to be deployed, and on
the main interaction paradigm preferred and assumed as natural by the target users.

Some years ago, the authors developed the SocialConnector system [18], which
runs in a tablet mounted on a wall at the home of the elderly. It allows them to interact
with other family members despite their apparent lack of a technology background.
Given that the system runs over a tablet, it is also used as a sensor, which helps evaluate
and monitor the mood of the elderly in real time, thus keeping informed family
members and caregivers accordingly. This monitoring service runs in the backend of
the application, so it is not visible for older adults. Therefore, the elderly are not fully
aware of the potential beneﬁts that this sensor is able to provide them and also to their
families. By considering this lack of value perceived by older adults and the fact that
these devices consume electricity, the elderly frequently decide to turn off the device.
In order to understand how to make the elderly aware of the beneﬁts of having
ambient assisted living (AAL) technology installed at their homes, we followed a
formal process to get lessons learned that can help other researchers and developers to
deal with this challenge. In particular, we aim to reﬂect on the best alternatives in terms
of design that would entice the elderly to keep the SocialConnector system turned on in
a real-life scenario. In fact, although a preliminary system evaluation indicated that the
elderly consider SocialConnector as a valuable tool [17, 18], several usability and
usefulness limitations were also identiﬁed. This paper presents the redesign process of
SocialConnector, in terms of improving both the usability of its user interface and the
perceived usefulness of the services provided to older adults. The redesign process
followed an action research approach [20], involving three improvement cycles with an
active participation of end-users. Then, the main contribution of this article is to present
a set of lessons learned that would help AAL technology designers to increase the
perceived value, usability and appropriation of their solutions, particularly when they
are targeted to the elderly.

The following section discusses the related work. We then describe the redesign
process of the SocialConnector system and highlight the main design implications

Introducing Ambient Assisted Living Technology at the Home of the Elderly

127

derived from the evaluation of each improvement cycle. Next, we discuss the lessons
learned from the whole process, and their relevance when envisioning improving AAL
technology acceptance by the elderly. Finally, we present the conclusions and provide
further perspectives on future work.

2 Related Work

There is a consensus that technology can help older adults improve their quality of life
[1, 9]. However, deploying assisted living technologies into the older adults’ homes
and enticing the elderly to actively use them can represent a major challenge. Literature
reports several reasons that explain this situation, including unfamiliarity with current
technology, computer anxiety, and low perceived usefulness [4, 27].

Chen and Chan [2] present a review of empirical research on technology acceptance
by older adults, based on 19 published studies. These studies considered the use of
TAM2 (Technology Acceptance Model) [25] for diagnosing the technology acceptance
level of the elderly (Fig. 1). Particularly, the perceived usefulness of the system and the
perceived effort required to use it, are the most inﬂuential variables for the technology
acceptance in older adults.

External 
Variables

Perceived 
Usefulness

(PU)

Perceived 
Ease of Use

(PEOU)

Attitudes
Towards
Using (AT)

Behavioral 
Intention to 
Use (BI)

Actual Usage 

Behavior

Fig. 1. Simpliﬁed version of TAM2 [25]

According to Chen and Chan [2], the strategies adopted to increase the usability
and perceived usefulness of these systems usually depend on cultural aspects of the
users. Indeed, the authors state that while European and American elders show a
positive attitude toward the inclusion of technology in their homes, it is not clear what
happens in Asian and Latin American countries, given that few studies have been
conducted in those socio-cultural contexts.

Concerning the particular case of AAL technologies, the probability of adoption of
these systems by older adults is still uncertain [10, 13]. Several barriers including
usability problems [5, 7], a lack of perceived usefulness [10, 15, 22] and technology

128

D. Muñoz et al.

self-efﬁcacy [10, 16] are the main issues that can jeopardize the successful adoption of
these technologies [12].

Considering these previous works, there seems to be a consensus that perceived
usefulness and perceived ease of use, i.e., the key variables identiﬁed by TAM2 [25],
are also the most inﬂuencing aspects that determine the technology adoption of older
adults, including AAL technologies [2, 13]. However, there is not a common recipe for
addressing the usability and usefulness of AAL systems, since they depend on
socio-cultural aspects of the end-users and also the type of device deployed at the home
of the elderly [6].

Following this line of reasoning, researchers have been trying to increase the
perceived usability of Websites by improving their accessibility following the Web
Content Accessibility Guidelines, issued by the World Wide Web Consortium [26]. In
order to improve the usability of computer-based systems for the elderly [14, 19, 28],
the literature reports that effort should be devoted to provide clearly visible elements all
throughout the user interface, with the content presented in an understandable manner
and focused on the object of the provided service without presenting unnecessary
information.

Similarly, in an attempt to improve the perceived usefulness of services provided
by domestic technology to mediate intra-family communication, such services should
introduce affordances for interaction without opening an obligation to the involved
participants [23]. For instance, effective approaches already covered in the literature
include family calendars [8] and photo displays retrieving information from social
media streams [3].

In summary, the reviewed literature indicates that the best way to increase the
feasibility to deploy the SocialConnector system into the homes of elderly people is
improving its usability and perceived usefulness. In order to achieve this goal, we
performed three action research cycles [20] to improve these aspects of the system. The
next section describes this reengineering process.

3 Redesigning the SocialConnector System

SocialConnector is a ubiquitous application that was initially conceived to increase the
social inclusion of older adults through the use of technology [18]. The system runs in a
tablet installed on a wall at the home of the elderly (Fig. 2), and it allows them to
interact with other family members using gestures and speech.

Older adults can exchange messages (emails) and hold videoconferences with other
members. However, the elderly are not actually aware of the all the provided services,
because the system interface hides the complexity of these processes. The ﬁrst version
of the SocialConnector also included a Web application that allows other family
members (typically, adult children and grandchildren) to interact with the elderly.

The system was acceptable for the end-users, but several improvement opportunities 
were also identiﬁed [17, 18]. This motivated the authors to conduct three action
research cycles that are explained in the next sections, which allowed us to get some
lessons learned.

Introducing Ambient Assisted Living Technology at the Home of the Elderly

129

Fig. 2. Older adult using the system

3.1 First Improvement Cycle

In this stage we installed the system at the living room of a house where three elderly
people live (Fig. 2). The people were a man (76 years old) and two women (74 and 70
years old). The use of the system was monitored during three consecutive days. The
elderly used the tool to interact with other family members; particularly with four adult
children (aged 54, 47, 46 and 39 years old) and four grandchildren (aged 22, 21, 16 and
13 years old).

The elderly also counted with the assistance of an adult child that supported and
monitored the usage of the system during the three days. The main goal of this
experience was to identify what services, provided by the system (i.e., exchange of
private and public messages, and videoconference), were valuable for the older adults,
and also if the way to access these services was appropriate for them. After that period,
we conducted a focus group with the elderly, one with the adults and one with the
young people. Detailed results of this study can be found in [18].

The ﬁndings from this improvement cycle indicate that the elderly were able to use
the system services and felt comfortable doing it. However, we veriﬁed that after such a
period, they used the system only when someone else was supporting them. According
to TAM2, this situation would indicate that the value of the system perceived by the
elderly is not enough for taking the initiative to use it. Moreover, the elderly mentioned
that they do not want to follow a login process for using the system.

The focus groups with adult children and grandchildren indicated that all of them
do not want to use a Web application to interact with their elders. Instead, they prefer to
use regular communication applications (e.g., email client applications or videoconference 
tools) to interact with the elderly. Moreover, and similarly to the older adults,
they do not want to follow a login process to use the system services. In summary, the
concepts represented by the envisaged Web application were neither particularly
valuable nor useful for adult children and grandchildren. This feedback was considered
for the next improvement cycle of the system.

3.2

Second Improvement Cycle

The new version of the application for older adults included a digital portrait service –
Tlatoque [3] – that displays photos, which are automatically retrieved from the

130

D. Muñoz et al.

Facebook accounts of the family members. This helped increase the perceived value of
the system by the elderly [18]. In addition, we implemented an automatic login process
for improving the system usability. Regarding the role of supporting family members,
we discarded the Web application for interacting with the elderly. Instead, we developed 
message exchange services that allow family members to use their preferred
communication media (e.g., Gmail, Skype, Facebook) to interact with their elders.

This improved version of the system was evaluated through a proof of concept
during three days. The participants were the same as those who took part in the ﬁrst
improvement cycle, aiming to assess the pertinence and added perceived value of the
redesigned and new services. Besides, we conducted a user study with a different group
of nine elders, in order to verify if the new version of the system could be considered as
useful and usable for them.

Proof of Concept with the Elderly. The elderly that used the new system implementation 
found it usable and particularly more useful than the original one. Both the
automatic login service and the new photo display were considered as highly valuable.
In contrast, they found the public message service as non-useful, because they did not
understand its purpose. Indeed, the users felt that this service did not ﬁt their mental
model on how social interactions are conducted. For instance, they assimilated private
messages as the process of writing and sending a letter; videoconferences were related
to phone calls, and the photo display was related to a family photo album. The lack of
understanding about the meaning of the public messages also appeared in the previous
evaluation, but it was not identiﬁed as such. In terms of usability, the elderly found the
system usable, but they realized that the main menu (Fig. 3a) is not visible when a
service turns active (e.g., in Fig. 3b and c), which disoriented them. The representation
of the temporal order of messages was also perceived as unclear. For instance, in
Fig. 3b, if users tap on the arrow at the right, it was not clear if the message shown
would be the next or the previous, in temporal order. This proof of concept also
allowed us to identify several other minor usability limitations.

(a)                                         

(b)

(c)

Fig. 3. User interface of the second improvement cycle of SocialConnector: (a) main menu,
(b) private message service, (c) photo display

User Study. Nine elderly aged between 61 and 89 years old participated in a user
study. In this evaluation process, we used paper prototyping [21] and the thinking
aloud protocol [24]. The users followed a protocol for evaluating the system services

Introducing Ambient Assisted Living Technology at the Home of the Elderly

131

and were asked to indicate why they chose one or another option of the user interface.
Although the participants were able to successfully accomplish the proposed tasks,
several limitations were identiﬁed. For instance, some of them did not understand the
meaning of some icons in the user interface; others were not able to go back to the main
menu after using a service. All of them perceived the public messages as not having
enough value for them, and many made mistakes when trying to ﬁnd a speciﬁc private
message, particularly when following the temporal order of the displayed information.
These results are consistent with those obtained in the proof of concept, so they were
used as input for the next improvement cycle.

Evaluation with Adults and Older People. In order to determine if the new interaction 
paradigm was appropriate for the rest of the family (i.e., those using their
preferred communication media for interacting with the elderly), we asked the participants 
of the ﬁrst evaluation to complete a set of tasks with their elders. We conducted 
semi-structured interviews with the participants once they have completed the
proposed tasks. The supporting family members felt comfortable with the proposed
interaction paradigm, mainly because they considered that it provided them ﬂexibility
and allowed them to interact with their elders almost effortlessly. Detailed results of this
study can be found in [17].

Summary of the Evaluation. The obtained results indicate that the proposed interaction 
paradigm was appropriate for adult children and grandchildren, and no further
requirements were identiﬁed for these users. Concerning the perception of the older
adults, we identiﬁed three main design aspects to improve: (1) the elderly need to have
the main menu visible at all times, to be aware that they have several options available
for interacting with others or for interacting with family information; (2) every element
in the user interface must be explicit about the function it performs (a single icon is not
enough); (3) the concept of public messages was not intuitive for the elderly; and
(4) the navigation plan used in every service must remain the same.

3.3 Third Improvement Cycle

The third action research cycle was focused on addressing these aspects of the system
and evaluating some new ones. We therefore designed a new version of the user
interface, where the public messages service was removed. Moreover, we explicitly
introduced redundancies in the form of text labels to improve the understanding of
icons (Fig. 4). In addition, we added a notiﬁcation service that periodically features the
weather forecast to the elderly, and also offers a family member birthday reminder.
Finally, badges were introduced to provide activity awareness about new messages and
photos.

Seven older adults, aged 61 to 74 years old, evaluated the usability and usefulness
of the system. The number of participants evaluating the system in this opportunity
adheres to existing recommendations in usability engineering [11]. The evaluators were
asked to use a high-ﬁdelity interactive prototype to complete a set of representative
tasks, using the services provided by the system, similarly to the previous experiences.

132

D. Muñoz et al.

Fig. 4. New user interface of the system

User Interface Usability. The older adults (OA) found the user interface usable. As
they were performing the tasks, the amount of mistakes and the average time decreased,
probably because of a learning effect. Some of the participants stated they would
actually use the system if they were taught how to do it, or that they would learn how to
use it if they had enough practice.

OA1: “Although it was complicated at the beginning [to use the system], now it is

not that much. If you practice about three times, you start getting how it is done”

Most of the elderly understood the meaning of the main menu buttons; in the other
cases, they did it after a brief explanation. The other elements of the user interface (e.g.,
badges, other icons, and buttons) were also mostly understood, and even considered as
useful by the elderly.

OA2: “I think it is quite useful that the system reminds you when you have new

messages or photos. I can easily note when there are new things to see!”

Services Usefulness. The elderly considered that videoconferences, new photos, and
the family album are the most useful services provided by the current implementation
of SocialConnector. This could be due to their preference to have face-to-face communication 
and because they need assistance to see photos in social networking services 
(SNS), such as Facebook or Flickr.

OA3: “I like these [services] very much. My granddaughters and my daughter

always show me photos, but I always depend on someone to do it”

Finally, most of the elderly praised the value provided by the notiﬁcation service for
reminding birthdays and special events of supporting family members. Among the
reasons given by the elderly is that they ﬁnd here an opportunity to plan in advance
how to greet them, and the chance to facilitate a physical encounter, such as a family
reunion.

Introducing Ambient Assisted Living Technology at the Home of the Elderly

133

4 Lessons Learned During the Redesign Process

This redesign process allowed us to identify several aspects that can help other
researchers realize the opportunities and limitations of technology in the homes of the
elderly. By considering the typical and expected reluctance of many older adults to use
technology, the system should be not only pervasive, but also usable and valuable for
them. Otherwise, the solution will be perceived as an unnecessary intervention to their
home, as well as a disruption to their daily lives, which makes them feel uncomfortable.
Next, we present the lessons learned about pervasiveness, usability and usefulness of
AAL supporting social systems.

Pervasiveness. In this sense, the pervasiveness of the SocialConnector system was
addressed through several mechanisms; for instance, an automatic login service, as well
as automatically turning the system screen on and off. Indeed, depending on the time of
day, the screen of the system is turned off when the elderly are sleeping, and it is turned
on when they wake up. In addition, the system automatically retrieves information from
the supporting family members’ SNS accounts, aiming to provide situational awareness
to the elderly about the doings and whereabouts of their relatives. Finally, family
members can use their preferred communication media to interact with the elderly,
which increases the pervasiveness of the system for all users.

Perceived Usability. The system usability was also addressed through several
mechanisms; for instance, the design of the user interface is simple and keeps the same
interaction paradigm in all services. The new design of the main menu allows the users
to keep a visual reference about both, the service they are currently using and a shortcut
to any other service. Every service included in the system represents a concept that is
well known for the elderly. The system uses badges to provide visual awareness about
new photos and messages, and visual notiﬁcations as birthday reminders and special
events. Much of this information is automatically provided by the system, without any
explicit action being required by the elderly. This design decision not only provides a
beneﬁt to the end-users, but also allows them to assimilate the system services at their
own pace.

Perceived Usefulness. Visual information is highly valuable for older adults. This is
evidenced in their appreciation toward the provided photo albums, videoconferences
and birthday reminders. If the users perceive the value of having an artifact such as
SocialConnector installed in their home, and the system does not unnecessarily disrupt
them, then they assume the system as a part of their life. In our case, given that we aim
to sense the mood of the elderly, as part of a broader health monitoring and sustainable
care model, having the system actively being used by the participants is mandatory for
achieving such a goal.

Similarly, the family members involved in the supporting network of the elderly
must also consider the system as being useful. Any AAL solution should ease family
members’ to accomplish with their routines without unnecessarily disrupting them.
Otherwise, there is a high probability that they will stop using the system.

134

D. Muñoz et al.

5 Conclusions and Future Work

Embedding technology at the home of the elderly is mandatory to support most AAL
systems; however, it represents a challenge not only for designers, but also for older
adults who could feel that technology invades their spaces and reduces their privacy.
To deal with this challenge,
the
SocialConnector system, which was not initially perceived as useful by older adults.
Following the TAM2 guidelines and an action research process, the usability and
perceived usefulness of the system were improved, as well as its pervasiveness. Three
improvement cycles were performed with the support of the end-users, and a set of
lessons learned was gathered from this process.

this article reports the redesign process of

Keeping simple yet meaningful interaction metaphors, like emulating the usage of
the tablet as a digital portrait, helped increase the learnability and perceived usefulness
of the system. The idea of facilitating public messages was not particularly useful for
the elderly, probably because it did not align with their mental model. However, the
elderly praised the interaction possibilities offered by the videoconferences and private
messages, as they consider them a way to maintain the contact with their family
members. Similarly, notiﬁcation badges for providing activity awareness, birthday
reminders and special events, and audio-enhanced interaction with the user interface
also proved useful when trying to persuade the elderly to approach the system and
trigger
its usage. These design implications are general enough to help other
researchers deal with this challenge when they have to deploy a technological solution
at the home of an elderly person.

Achieving the goal of making the elderly accept and use the provided technology is
a ﬁrst, but key step to performing more complex and interesting activities. In our case,
the SocialConnector system currently allows us to monitor in the ﬁeld other aspects of
the older adults, such as their mood, health status and movements. This has the
potential to help us implement sustainable health care models for the elderly, where
both family members and caregivers can act as facilitators, actively engaging in the
process.

Acknowledgements. This work has been partially supported by the Fondecyt Project (Chile),
grant: 1150252. The work of Francisco J. Gutierrez has been supported by the Ph.D. Scholarship
Program of Conicyt Chile (CONICYT-PCHA/Doctorado Nacional/2013-21130075).

References

1. Bouma, H., Fozard, J.L., Bouwhuis, D.G., Taipale, V.: Gerontechnology in perspective.

Gerontechnology 6(4), 190–216 (2007)

2. Chen, K., Chan, A.H.S.: A review of

technology acceptance by older adults.

Gerontechnology 10(1), 1–12 (2011)

3. Cornejo, R., Tentori, M., Favela, J.: Ambient awareness to strengthen the family social

network of older adults. Comput. Support. Coop. Work 22, 309–344 (2013)

Introducing Ambient Assisted Living Technology at the Home of the Elderly

135

4. Czaja, S., Charness, N., Fisk, D., Hertzog, C., Nair, A.N., Rogers, W.A., Sharit, J.: Factors
predicting the user of technology: ﬁndings from the Center for Research and Education on
Aging and Technology. Psychol. Aging 21(2), 333–352 (2006)

5. Demiris, G., Rantz, M.J., Aud, M.A., Marek, K.D., Tyrer, H.W., Skubic, M., Hussam, A.A.:
Older adults’ attitudes towards and perceptions of ‘smart home’ technologies: a pilot study.
Inform. Health Soc. Care 29(2), 87–94 (2004)

6. Doyle, J., Bailey, C., Ni, C., van den Berg, F.: Lessons learned in deploying independent
living technologies to older adults’ homes. Univ. Access Inf. Soc. 13(2), 191–204 (2014)
7. Fisk, A.D., Rogers, W.A., Charness, N., Czaja, S.J., Sharit, J.: Designing for Older Adults:

Principles and Creative Human Factors Approaches. CRC Press, Boca Raton (2012)

8. Forghani, A., Neustaedter, C.: The routines and needs of grandparents and parents for
In: Proceedings of CHI 2014,

grandparentgrandchild 
conversations over distance.
pp. 4177–4186. ACM Press, Toronto ON, Canada (2014)

9. Fozard, J.L.: Impacts of technology on health and self-esteem. Gerontechnology 4(2), 63–76

(2005)

10. Heart, T., Kalderon, E.: Older adults: are they ready to adopt health-related ICT? Int. J. Med.

Informatics 82(11), e209–e231 (2011)

11. Holzinger, A.: Usability engineering methods for software developers. Commun. ACM 48

(1), 71–74 (2005)

12. Jaschinski, C., Ben Allouch, S.: Ambient assisted living: beneﬁts and barriers from a

user-centered perspective. In: Proceedings of AMBIENT 2014, Rome, Italy (2014)

13. Jaschinski, C.: Ambient assisted living: towards a model of technology adoption and use
among elderly users. In: Proceedings of UbiComp 2014 Adjunct Publication, pp. 319–324.
ACM Press Seattle WA, USA (2014)

14. Kurniawan, S., Zaphiris, P.: Research-derived web design guidelines for older people. In:

Proceedings of ASSETS 2005, pp. 129–135. ACM Press, Baltimore MD, USA (2005)

15. Melenhorst, A.S., Rogers, W.A., Caylor, E.C.: The use of communication technologies by
older adults: exploring the beneﬁts from the user’s perspective. In: Proceedings of the HFES
Annual Meeting 2001, vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 221–225 (2001)

16. Morris, A., Goodman, J., Brading, H.: Internet use and non-use: views of older users. Univ.

Access Inf. Soc. 6(1), 43–57 (2007)

17. Muñoz, D., Cornejo, R., Gutierrez, F.J., Favela, J., Ochoa, S.F., Tentori, M.: A social
to deal with time and media mismatch of intergenerational family

cloud-based tool
communication. Future Gener. Comput. Syst. (2014, in press)

18. Muñoz, D., Gutierrez, F.J., Ochoa, S.F., Baloian, N.: SocialConnector: a ubiquitous system
to ease the social interaction among family community members. Comput. Syst. Sci. Eng. 30
(1), 57–68 (2015)

19. Patsoule, E., Koutsabasis, P.: Redesigning web sites for older adults. In: Proceedings of

PETRA 2012, Heraklion, Crete, Greece (2012)

20. Reason, P., Bradbury, H.: Handbook of Action Research, 2nd edn. Sage, London (2007)
21. Sefelin, R., Tscheligi, M., Giller, V.: Paper prototyping - what is it good for?: a comparison
of paper and computer-based low-ﬁdelity prototyping. In: Proceedings of CHI 2003
Extended Abstracts, pp. 778–779. ACM Press, Ft. Lauderdale FL, USA (2003)

22. Steele, R., Lo, A., Secombe, C., Wong, Y.K.: Elderly persons’ perception and acceptance of
using wireless sensor networks to assist healthcare. Int. J. Med. Informatics 78(12), 788–801
(2009)

23. Tee, K., Brush, A.J.B., Inkpen, K.M.: Exploring communication and sharing between

extended families. Int. J. Hum Comput Stud. 67, 128–138 (2009)

24. van Someren, M.W., Barnard, Y.F., Sandberg, J.A.: The Think Aloud Method: A Practical

Guide to Modelling Cognitive Processes. Academic Press, London (1994)

136

D. Muñoz et al.

25. Venkatesh, V., Davis, F.: A theoretical extension of the technology acceptance model: four

longitudinal ﬁeld studies. Manage. Sci. 46(2), 186–204 (2000)

26. Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0. http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20.

Accessed 16 Jun 2015

27. Yao, D.F., Qiu, Y.F., Du, Z.X., Ma, J.Q., Huang, H.: A survey of technology accessibility
problems faced by older users in China. In: Proceedings of W4A 2009, pp. 16–25. ACM
Press, New York NY, USA (2009)

28. Zaphiris, P., Pfeil, U., Xhixho, D.: User evaluation of age-centred web design guidelines. In:
Stephanidis, C. (ed.) Universal Access in HCI, Part I, HCII 2009. LNCS, vol. 5614,
pp. 677–686. Springer, Heidelberg (2009)

