 

Analyzing Two Participation Strategies  
in an Undergraduate Course Community 

Francisco Gutierrez1, Gustavo Zurita2, Sergio F. Ochoa1, and Nelson Baloian1 

1 Computer Science Department, Universidad de Chile 
Av. Blanco Encalada 2120, 3rd Floor, Santiago, Chile 

{frgutier,sochoa,nbaloian}@dcc.uchile.cl 

2 Management Control and Information Systems Department, Universidad de Chile 

Diagonal Paraguay 257, Santiago, Chile 

gzurita@fen.uchile.cl  

Abstract.  Nowadays,  information  systems,  and  more  particularly,  learning 
support  systems,  tend  to  include  social  interaction  features  in  their  design. 
These  features  generally  aim  to  sustain  the  activities  of  partially  virtual 
communities  and  help  extend  the  physical  presence  of  the  community  in  the 
virtual  space.  In  order  to  achieve  a  sustainable  community,  it  is  important  to 
understand how the strategies used to promote participation influence the way 
in which community members interact and relate with each other. This article 
reports  a  comparative  study  on  two  different  student  participation  strategies 
mediated by a learning support system. The first strategy stressed the quantity 
of  contributions,  and  the  second  one  promoted  both  quantity  and  quality  of 
contributions. By analyzing the resulting interaction networks, we could better 
understand  the  interaction  patterns  among  students  in  their  respective 
communities  and  conclude  ways  to  monitor  interaction  and help maintain  the 
community sustainability in time. 

Keywords:  Interaction  patterns,  participation,  community  structure,  sociotechnical 
analysis, monitoring, partially virtual communities. 

1 

Introduction 

Social  computing  has  become  an  important  field  in  the  research  agenda  of  the 
groupware  community.  In  fact,  since  its  16th  edition  in  2013,  the  ACM  CSCW 
conference (one of the most competitive and cited in the field) changed its name to: 
“ACM  Conference  on  Computer  Supported  Cooperative  Work  and  Social 
Computing”, thus reflecting a particular interest on socio-technical issues. 

Online  communities  are  changing  the  fundamental  way  in  which  people  share 
information  and  communicate  among  them.  This  is  affecting  the  global  economy, 
social interaction, and every aspect of our lives [25]. This paradigm shift changes the 
main issues involved in the design and development of collaborative systems. It raises 
a  number  of  questions  linking  social  sciences  and  human-computer  interaction,  

P. Antunes et al. (Eds.): CRIWG 2013, LNCS 8224, pp. 143–158, 2013. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 

144 

F. Gutierrez et al. 

such  as  stating  the  relationships  between  software,  social  groups,  and  individuals; 
managing  privacy  and  security  concerns;  and  also  establishing  relevant  criteria  for 
measuring the success of online and partially virtual communities. 

Interaction in these communities can be found in several situations. For example, it 
can  be  completely  based  in  the  virtual  space  (e.g.  gaming  communities),  or  it  may 
lead to extend the physical presence toward a virtual scenario (e.g. students using an 
online  discussion  board  outside  their  class  hours)  and,  conversely,  augment  the 
physical  space  with  information  brought  from  the  virtual  space  (e.g.  a  Facebook 
notification  system  triggering  an  alert  in  a  mobile  phone  when  a  contact  becomes 
available).  Since  most  physical  communities  may  benefit  from  extending  their 
presence into an online environment, we are interested in studying in more depth, the 
dynamics of what Gutierrez et al. refer to as partially virtual communities [8]. In these 
communities, members have the opportunity to interact through both, a virtual and a 
physical space. Their members know each other, and this mutual information is useful 
to understanding the context of the contributions of others. 

In  fact,  when  we  consider  learning  communities,  today  various  universities  use 
learning platforms that support interaction among students and instructors, mainly in 
the form of online asynchronous discussion boards. This form of social interaction is 
broadly  accepted  as  a  way  to  support  different  courses,  for  both  instructors  and 
students, [17] and it has led to an understanding of how these tools are used [19]. 

These communities usually suffer from a lack of user participation at their initial 
stages  of  their  life  cycle.  Therefore,  it  turns  out  necessary  to  motivate  people  to 
contribute using different strategies that  may  help the community reach a  minimum 
number of users and content, in order to ensure its sustainability over time [3]. This 
situation raises a couple of questions: (1) how do users react to different participation 
strategies  when  they  get  exposed  to  generate  new  content?,  and  (2)  how  do  these 
strategies impact the structure of the community?. 

This  article  reports  the  results  of  a  comparative  study,  where  two  homogeneous 
groups of university students were exposed (through the use of a learning platform) to 
two  different  participation  strategies.  The  first  strategy  enhanced  the  quantity  of 
students’ contributions, and the second one enhanced the quantity of contributions, as 
well as the perceived quality of them by others. 

Each  group  was  assigned  to  a  dedicated  online  discussion  board  that  supported 
their  activities  as  a  partially  virtual  community,  and  we  gathered  data  in  a  monthly 
basis over a period of 15 weeks, concerning the number of published articles for all 
users and the number of replies given to the published articles. Afterwards, we built 
the  interaction  network  for  each  group,  and  we  analyzed  how  it  evolved  over  time. 
The  analysis  of  the  results  indicates  that  the  participation  strategy  used  to  motivate 
contributions in the community indeed marked a difference on the interaction patterns 
of their members, and that by performing such an analysis it is possible to monitor the 
evolution of the community over its life cycle. 

Next  section  reviews  participation  strategies  in  online  communities,  as  well  as 
interaction  patterns  in  social  networks.  Section  3  describes  the  case  study,  the 
participation strategies used, and the metrics used to analyze the community structure. 
Section 4 shows and discusses the obtained results. Section 5 presents the conclusions 
and further work. 

 

Analyzing Two Participation Strategies in an Undergraduate Course Community 

145 

2 

Related Work 

This  section  first  introduces  reported  strategies  for  fostering  participation  in  online 
and  partially  virtual  communities.  We  then  present  some  of  the  most  well  known 
methods, used in Social Network Analysis, for quantifying and analyzing interaction 
patterns among members of a social group.  

2.1 

Participation in Online Communities 

The  problem  of  improving  participation  in  online  communities  has  been  tackled  by 
considering theories derived mainly from social psychology. For example, Cheng and 
Vassileva proposed a  motivation strategy based on persuasion, in order to reinforce 
the  value  of  quantity  and  quality  in  user  contributions  [2].  Harper  et  al.  studied  the 
effects of social comparisons (i.e., displaying how community members can compare 
to  others  in  the  system,  e.g.  in  terms  of  performance,  participation  and  interaction) 
[10].  Janzik  and  Herstatt  proposed  a  set  of  incentives  to  motivate  community 
members (using peer recognition, status, reputation, and identification) [12]. 

Preece and Shneiderman followed users’ life cycles through their evolution in a 
community and listed strategies for motivating their participation according to their 
evolving  role  within  the  group  [20].  Gutierrez  et  al.  proposed  a  framework  for 
motivating user participation based on intrinsic motivation, which included several 
strategies  such  as  displaying  rankings,  proposing  challenges,  and  displaying 
feedback [7]. In the case of physical and partially virtual communities, Westerlund 
et al. found out that trust and commitment are multi-dimensional constructs, where 
their  evolution  in  a  social  network  is  dynamic  and  complex.  Typically,  trust 
precedes commitment [28]. 

Several authors claim that communities have to achieve a certain critical mass, i.e., 
a  minimum  number  of  users  in  order  to  sustain  activity  and  information  exchanges 
within the group [1, 14, 21]. Dabbish et al. studied the effects of turnover in online 
communities, i.e., the dynamics of user entrance and exiting in a particular group. In 
online  communities,  both  participation  and  member  commitment  tend  to  increase 
when  there  is  a  noticeable  turnover.  This  is  understood  by  the  group  members  as  a 
dynamic  evidence  of  the  community  activity  and  it  is  consequently  perceived  by 
them. Therefore, turnover may dramatically impact information exchange and content 
generation within the group. It turns out to be more important for the sustainability of 
a community to achieve a critical mass of contributions rather than a critical mass of 
users [4]. 

According to Cheng and Vassileva, regulating the quality and the quantity of user 
contributions, therefore ensuring a sustainable level of user participation in an online 
community, requires an adaptation of the participant rewards for particular forms of 
participation,  depending  on  the  user  reputation  and  the  current  needs  of  the 
community. Their proposed methodology is to measure and reward the desirable user 
activities by computing a user participation measure (in order to enhance quantity and 
quality of contributions), and then clustering users according to this value [3]. 

146 

F. Gutierrez et al. 

2.2 

Social Network Analysis 

Discussion  boards  (i.e.  a  space  where  users  can  interact  through  posted  messages, 
mainly  in  an  asynchronous  way)  are  broadly  accepted  as  a  tool  for  supporting  user 
interaction in online communities. In fact, among all the different forms of computermediated 
 communication  used 
teaching  processes, 
asynchronous discussion boards are the most frequently used [9]. 

learning  and 

to  support 

Researchers  and  instructors  claim  that  discussion  boards  reinforce  the  learning 
experience by increasing student commitment in their courses, resulting therefore in 
significantly  better  results  [17].  However,  participation  and  interaction  in  online 
discussion  boards  does  not  necessarily  translate  to  higher  grades  at  the  end  of  an 
academic  period  [6,  19].  In  terms  of  platform  support,  Vonderwell  and  Zachariah 
found  that  technology,  user  interface  design,  content-area  experience,  student  roles 
and  tasks,  and  information  overload,  influence  online  learner  participation  and  their 
interaction patterns [24]. 

For  better  understanding  the  underlying  interaction  patterns  that  emerge  in  a 
particular  kind  of  human  group,  social  scientists  have  historically  used  techniques 
from social  network analysis  [26]. In formal  terms, social  network analysts  work at 
describing  underlying  patterns  of  social  structure  (based  on  people  interactions), 
explaining  the  impact  of  such  social  structures  on  other  variables  [27].  Since  the 
1970s,  the  empirical  study  of  social  networks  has  played  a  central  role  in  social 
science,  and  many  of  the  mathematical  and  statistical  tools  used  for  studying  these 
networks have been first developed in sociology [18]. 

Social network analysis manages social relationships in terms of network theory. It 
models individual actors within the network as nodes, and the relationships between 
them as ties. For example, Alice and Bob are friends in real life, and they declare this 
relationship in Facebook. This representation is modeled as Alice and Bob as nodes in 
the network, and they are tied by a relationship that reflects their friendship. 

Several  approaches  for  social  network  analysis  have  been  successfully  used  in 
CSCL  scenarios  to  understand  participation  and  interaction  aspects  during  learning 
processes [11, 15, 16, 22]. Course communities can be  understood as graphs  where 
the students represent the nodes and the edges indicate the relationship among nodes. 
Therefore, social network analysis techniques are mainly expressed in terms of graph 
theory. Among the main metrics used to characterize and study social networks, we 
identify: degrees, centrality, density, clustering, cliques, and cohesion [23]. Finally, a 
visual representation of social networks is important to understand the network data 
and convey the result of the analysis [5]. 

Since social networks can be represented as graphs, it is natural to assume that it 
can  be  composed  by  a  wide  variety  of  sub-graphs.  One  important  local  property  of 
these  networks  is  the  so-called  network  motifs,  which  is  defined  as  recurrent  and 
statistically  significant  sub-graphs  (or  patterns)  that  are  present  in  the  network. 
Although  network  motifs  may  provide  a  deep  insight  into  the  network  functional 
abilities, their detection is computationally challenging [13]. 

 

Analyzing Two Participation Strategies in an Undergraduate Course Community 

147 

3 

Case Study Scenario 

This  section  describes  the  global  scenario  used  for  studying  the  effects  of  two 
different participation strategies and how they affect the interaction patterns among its 
group  members.  Later,  we  identify  and  discuss  the  key  metrics  to  quantify  in  our 
analysis. 

3.1 

Settings 

We worked with two groups of students (30 and 48 people respectively) enrolled in 
the  course  Information  Technology  from  the  Business  School  at  the  University  of 
Chile. The first group was composed of 30 students (16 men and 14 women), and they 
participated in this study between March and June 2012. The second group involved 
48 students (19 men and 29 women) that participated between August and November 
2012. None of the students was in both groups simultaneously. 

Within each group, we put two versions of an online discussion board in service, 
which  runs  on  the  learning  platform  that  students  regularly  use  to  support  their 
activities. Both discussion boards offered exactly the same services (e.g. publication 
of new topics, possibility of replying to others’ contributions, notifications concerning 
user  availability  and  recent  activity),  except  that  they  used  different  algorithms  to 
calculate the users’ participation. This metric was visible in the user interface of the 
tool, and it was also used to rank the students according to their participation. 

The course lecturer and teaching assistants had also access to the platform, but they 
had no privileges to moderate content, nor were identified as having a different role. 
This  reduces  the  pressure  on  community  members  and  allows  them  to  express 
themselves. Thus, it was possible to properly identify their interaction patterns. 

As part of their mandatory assignments for completing the course, students had to 
perform  three  short  projects,  pass  three  exams  and  regularly  contribute  in  the 
discussion  board  by  including  recent  news  found  in  diverse  media  related  to  the 
different  topics  covered  in  the  lecture  sessions.  In  order  to  make  a  contribution, 
students  had  to  select  news,  cite  their  respective  sources  (e.g.  a  link  to  the  original 
article  found  on  the  Web),  and  write  a  short  personal  opinion  on  it.  Once  this 
contribution is made available in the software platform, other students had the chance 
to rate the article (according to their own perception on quality and pertinence) and 
comment on the contribution. It is important to note that ratings could only be made 
after  a  student  commented  on  the  contribution  in  order  to  address  the  typical  free 
riding situations. 

The user interface is divided into two  modules: (1) a main page  where users can 
read the different contributions published in the site, and (2) a detailed view of one of 
these  contributions.  The  first  module  displays  a  list  of  the  10  most  recent 
contributions, a tag cloud and a panel of links pointing to other articles classified by 
categories  and  relevant  tags  (Fig.  1).  This  element,  alongside  with  the  search  bar, 
helps  users  identify  and  find  relevant  documents,  facilitating  thus  the  interaction 
between  the  author  and  the  reader.  Users  can  access  to  the  detailed  view  of  any 
contribution by either clicking on its title, content, or dedicated icon at the bottom of 
the  box.  Other  articles  can  be  found  by  navigating  through  different  pages  at  the 
bottom of the site. 

148 

F. Gutierrez et al. 

Fig. 1. General user interface of the online discussion board 

 

The detailed view of each contribution displays the complete text (citing the source 
from where it was taken), the personal opinion of the author regarding the content of 
the article, and a list of reactions made to the contribution by other students (Fig. 2). 
Once  a  student  publishes  a  comment  linked  to  a  particular  contribution,  the  system 
proposes a rating system for grading the perceived quality of the article on a scale of 
one  to  seven  stars.  We  chose  to  set  this  metaphor,  since  students  are  graded  in  a 
similar way in their regular courses at the University.  

The platform was in service for both groups over 15 weeks. We established three 
milestones  where  we  gathered  the  traffic  data  from  the  site,  and  afterwards 
reinitialized the counters. These milestones were roughly placed every five weeks, in 
order  to  make  results  comparable  not  only  between  groups,  but  also  to  analyze  the 
evolution of the interaction patterns over time.  

In each milestone, we identified: (1) the number of published contributions of each 
student;  (2)  the  perceived  quality  of  the  contributions  by  other  students;  (3)  the 
number of comments to other articles  made by each student; and (4) the number of 
comments  received  by  the  other  students.  With  these  values,  we  computed  a 
participation metric for each student, according to the strategy used in each situation. 
Moreover, each student could see his/her participation value in the home page of the 
platform  every  time  s/he  logged  in.  In  this  section  of  the  home  page,  the  students 
could  get  the  computed  value  for  their  participation,  and  a  label  that  situated  them 
within the group. We classified students in three categories: “high participation” (top 
20%  of  the  whole  group),  “low  participation”  (bottom  20%  of  the  group),  and 
“medium participation”. 

 

Analyzing Two Participation Strategies in an Undergraduate Course Community 

149 

Fig. 2. Detailed user interface for the comments 

 

The maximum and minimum values to set up the three categories were calculated 
in real time. At each milestone, we published the participation values for all students 
and we reinitialized the counters for all metrics. 

3.2  Measuring User Participation 

Every group involved in this study used a particular participation strategy to motivate 
contributions.  We  computed  the  participation  function  with  the  values  gathered  in 
each milestone, considering the number of published articles (A), perceived quality of 
the  contributions  (Q),  number  of  published  comments  to  other  students  (PC),  and 
number of received comments from other students (RC). 

In  the  first  scenario  (i.e.  the  first  group),  we  highlighted  the  quantity  of 
contributions  rather  than  the  quality  of  them.  With  this  strategy,  our  aim  was  for 
students to increase the number of contributions in time. Considering the four metrics, 
we computed the value of participation (P) for the first group as follows: 

P = A + PC . 

(1)

The participation value is in this case a function of the number of published articles 
and the published comments to other students. We purposely did not consider in Eq. 1 
the  value  of  received  comments  and  the  perceived  quality  of  the  contributions  by 
other students. 

On the other hand, the second scenario (i.e. the second group) also included quality 
as a dimension of how participation is measured. With this strategy, we also aimed to 
increase  the  number  of  contributions,  but  also  to  improve  the  perceived  quality  of 
them  by  the  other  students  of  the  group.  In  this  case,  we  computed  the  value  of 
participation (P) as follows: 

150 

F. Gutierrez et al. 

P = A x Q / 2 + RC . 

(2)

In this case, the participation value stresses the quality of the contributions, since 
those that are perceived as more “useful” or “pertinent” by other members, will weigh 
more  in  the  participation  value  of  a  student.  The  students  were  pushed  to  write 
personal opinions with a minimum length (300 words) before publishing the article, in 
order to ensure a certain level of quality.  

In Eq. 2 we have also considered the number of received comments instead of the 
published ones. This was done for two reasons: (1) students will tend to comment on 
those  articles  that  they  find  interesting  or  useful,  therefore  they  might  be  of  better 
quality;  and  (2)  when  a  student  posts  a  comment  on  the  contribution  of  another 
student, s/he helps increase the other’s participation value instead of his/her own. 

3.3  Relevant Metrics to Analyze 

We modeled the interaction  network as a  weighted directed graph,  where the  nodes 
are the students and the edges between nodes represent the number and direction of 
comments that one student published to another. Figure 3 shows an example of the 
representation of the network: Alice, Bob and Charlie are students in the course and 
published at least one article; Alice posted three comments to Bob, Bob commented 
four articles written by Charlie, but Charlie only returned one comment to Bob. 
 

Fig. 3. Example of the interaction network 

 

In  order  to  understand  the  interaction  network,  we  analyzed  these  interactions 

considering the following metrics: 
•  Indegree: This metric represents the number of edges that arrive to a given node. It 

can be understood as the number of students who write to a particular node. 

•  Weighted indegree: This indicates the number of edges that arrive to a given node, 
weighted  by  the  number  of  comments.  This  metric  can  be  understood  as  the 
number of comments that a given student receives. 

•  Outdegree: This metric shows the number of edges that emerge from a given node. 

It can be understood as the number of students that a particular node is writing to. 

 

Analyzing Two Participation Strategies in an Undergraduate Course Community 

151 

•  Weighted outdegree: This is the number of edges that emerge from a given node, 
weighted by the number of comments. It represents the number of comments that a 
student posts in the community. 

•  Modularity: This is a factor between -0.5 and 1.0 that reflects the division of the 
network into groups within which the network connections are dense, but between 
which they are sparser. If this value is positive, the number of edges within groups 
exceeds the number expected on the basis of chance. When this value approaches 
1,  it  means  the  strength  of  division  of  a  graph  structure  is  high  (e.g.  clear  and 
distinct groups within the community). 

Finally, we will analyze the different triads that coexist within the network in the 
form of 3-node motifs. There are 13 different isomorphic 3-node motifs, and they are 
presented in Figure 4. It is worth pointing out that among these motifs, seven of them 
are complete (or partially complete), since they tend to form 3-cliques (i.e. a subset of 
three nodes in a graph, such that every two nodes in the subset are connected by an 
edge).  On  the  other  hand,  six  of  the  motifs  are  partially  incomplete,  since  they 
represent the interaction between only two out of the three nodes in the triad. 
 

Fig. 4. Isomorphic 3-node motifs 

 

4 

Analysis of the Results 

This section reports the main results obtained by analyzing participation metrics and 
the  graph  structure  of  the  two  networks  used  in  the  study.  For  analyzing  and 
visualizing the networks, we used the software Gephi v.0.8.  

152 

F. Gutierrez et al. 

We first analyze the main participation metrics defined in section 3, and then  we 
show  the  main  structural  metrics  of  the  graph.  Later,  we  identify  and  quantify  the 
different  3-node  motifs  that  compose  the  structure  of  each  network.  Finally,  we 
comparatively  discuss  these  results  between  both  scenarios  in  order  to  better 
understand how the different participation strategies affect both interaction networks 
(and hence, the interaction patterns among students in their respective communities). 

4.1 

Participation Metrics 

Table 1 presents the mean values obtained for the participation metrics (i.e. number of 
published  articles,  perceived  quality  of  contributions,  and  number  of  comments)  in 
each scenario. It is  worth pointing out that after each  milestone,  we reinitialized all 
counters. 

Table 1. Participation Metrics (Mean Value) 

 

Scenario 1 
Number of articles 
Perceived quality 
Comments 

Scenario 2 
Number of articles 
Perceived quality 
Comments 

Weeks 1 – 5 
11.31 
5.89 / 7.00 
28.97 

Weeks 1 – 5 
3.20 
6.22 / 7.00 
14.00 

Weeks 6 – 10 
6.41 
5.92 / 7.00 
13.00 

Weeks 6 – 10 
7.15 
6.45 / 7.00 
23.35 

Weeks 11 – 15 
12.17 
5.95 / 7.00 
31.97 

Weeks 11 – 15 
12.41 
6.27 / 7.00 
20.15 

 
The  results  show  that  the  perceived  quality  of  contributions  was  better  in  the 
second  scenario  than  in  the  first  one.  This  can  be  a  positive  response  to  the 
participation strategy  motivating quality. However, the number of published articles 
in  the  second  scenario  was  lower  than  in  the  first  one,  even  if  there  were  more 
students  in  the  second  group.  This  can  be  explained  since  in  the  second  scenario  it 
was mandatory for students to submit a personal opinion of at least 300 words before 
publishing  the  contribution  in  the  platform.  Finally,  the  mean  number  of  comments 
per  article  significantly  increased  in  the  second  case  (3.09)  with  respect  to  the  first 
one  (2.12).  This  can  be  explained  because  we  induced  a  quality  factor  in  the 
participation  strategy,  and  this  could  have  triggered  more  interest  to  generate  better 
and  more  appealing  contributions.  Nevertheless,  in  order  to  properly  conclude  this 
fact, we need to carry on further research regarding this situation. 

4.2  Network Analysis 

After  building  the  interaction  graph  (in  each  milestone),  we  quantified  the  metrics 
presented in  section 3.3 in order to analyze the structure of the community  in time. 
Table 2 presents these results for each study scenario. 

 

Analyzing Two Participation Strategies in an Undergraduate Course Community 

153 

Table 2. Network Metrics 

Scenario 1 (30 nodes) 
Edges 
Average degree 
Average weighted degree 
Modularity 

 

Scenario 2 (48 nodes) 
Edges 
Average degree 
Average weighted degree 
Modularity 

Weeks 1 – 5
292
9.73
17.03
0.12

Weeks 1 – 5
436
9.08
13.42
0.28

Weeks 6 – 10
282
9.40
25.13
0.12

Weeks 6 – 10
662
13.79
22.38
0.19

Weeks 11 – 15 
321 
10.70 
34.53 
0.14 

Weeks 11 – 15 
429 
8.94 
19.31 
0.40 

 
Despite the differences in the number of nodes (and hence, the number of edges) in 
these  situations,  both  the  average  degree  (i.e.  the  mean  number  of  students  that  are 
connected through comments) and the average weighted degree (i.e. the mean number 
of published comments in the platform) remain similar. However, there is a noticeable 
difference in both scenarios concerning what happened during the last five weeks: the 
average  weighted  degree  is  significantly  greater  in  the  first  scenario,  and  the 
modularity is significantly greater in the second scenario. 

Regarding the first situation, this might be a consequence of a “snowball effect”, 
since  the  goal  of  the  participation  strategy  was  merely  to  increase  the  number  of 
contributions in the community. Therefore, the perceived metric of success is linked 
to  the  number  of  contributions  published  by  the  students.  In  fact,  since  posting  a 
comment requires less effort than selecting and publishing a new article. This can be a 
plausible  explanation  for  this  particular  difference.  Moreover,  this  is  linked  to  the 
participation metrics for the third period, presented in table 1. 

Concerning the second situation, the higher value of modularity is opposed to the 
closed  and  homogeneous  structure  of  the  community  during  the  whole  observation 
period  in  the  first  scenario  (when  the  participation  was  motivated  uniquely  through 
quantity of contributions). It  is  worth pointing out that  greater values of  modularity 
are correlated to the formation of subgroups within the community.  

In order to have a closer look at what happened in this situation, Figures 5 and 6 
show  a  visualization  of  each  interaction  network  at  the  end  of  third  milestone  (i.e. 
covering  weeks  11  through  15).  The  size  of  nodes  represents  the  value  of  the 
weighted  indegree,  the  colors  represent  the  different  modularity  classes,  and  the 
thickness  of  the  edges  represents  the  number  of  comments  that  are  posted  in  that 
particular sense. 

In the interaction network of the second scenario (Figure 6), we can identify a clear 
subgroup  in  the  community  (i.e.  black  nodes).  This  subgroup  consists  of  12  nodes 
(25%  of  the  network),  it  has  a  noticeable  central  leader  (the  biggest  node  in  the 
group), and also a small node that is in between both subgroups. On the other hand, 
the interaction network in the first scenario (Figure 5) does not display a clear leader 
within the community, but rather a set of central nodes that gather the attention and 
drive the interaction of the other students. The structure in this case is rather closed 
and it does not display clear subgroups. 

154 

F. Gutierrez et al. 

Fig. 5. Interaction network: Scenario 1 – Weeks 11 through 15 

Fig. 6. Interaction network: Scenario 2 – Weeks 11 through 15 

  

  

 

Analyzing Two Participation Strategies in an Undergraduate Course Community 

155 

At this point, it turns out relevant to analyze if it is worth considering a community 
structure that is composed of two or more independent subgroups, or if it is better to 
have a closed and tightly connected group. Both situations have their own pros and 
cons, and the answer to this dilemma is rather unclear since the answer depends on 
the context where the community is going to be established. In this case, since we are 
supporting a small partially virtual community, we would like to benefit from having 
discussions in small groups. However, to some extent we do have to maintain the size 
of these subgroups, avoiding that they become independent and generate traffic that 
will  be  eventually  irrelevant  to  the  rest  of  the  community.  Therefore,  having  a 
visualization  that  displays  the  dynamics  of  group  generation  over  time  would  give 
signs of how the community is evolving, and also if it turns out to be necessary to put 
some control mechanisms in order to prevent the community break into independent 
subgroups. In other terms, this kind of analysis can be used for designing strategies 
for monitoring in real-time the dynamics of a community alongside its life cycle. In 
relation  to  this  proposition,  one  way  to  affect  the  interaction  patterns  in  the 
community would be to influence central nodes in the network (e.g. those that gather 
interest from other members and generate relevant and important traffic). In terms of 
affecting  the  participation  strategy,  this  would  be  related  to  motivating  the  activity, 
aiming  to  integrate  the  different  groups  that  appear  to  be  in  different  modularity 
classes. 

4.3 

Identifying and Quantifying Motifs 

Figure 7 shows a histogram representing the different isomorphic 3-node motifs in a 
directed network (as  shown in Figure 4). By identifying the different 3-node  motifs 
we can structurally analyze the network representing the community in more depth. In 
the case of Figure 7, we can see that it supports the results found when analyzing the 
modularity of the community.  

In the first scenario (i.e. where participation was stressed in terms of quantity), the 
interaction patterns tended to close the group. Thus, the possibility of completing 3cliques 
is higher. In this group, motifs 12 and 13 count for about 50% of the total, and 
they  are  almost-fully  connected  (12)  and  fully  connected  (13)  3-cliques.  Therefore, 
this is an alternative way to conclude that the community was tightly closed. 

Regarding the second scenario, the motifs 3, 7 and 8 count for about 50% of the 
total,  and  they  all  correspond  to  disconnected  3-motifs.  This  fact  indicates  that  the 
community is partially connected (as opposed to what happened in the first scenario), 
and  community  managers  could  take  some  actions  into  identifying  why  this  is 
happening. Eventually they can try to integrate the community, if desired. 

In  summary,  by  analyzing  the  histogram  of  3-node  motifs,  community  managers 
can  get  an  overview  of  how  connected  is  the  community,  and  how  the  different 
interaction patterns are distributed in the whole group. In other words, this technique 
can  be  used  as  an  alternative  tool  for  monitoring  the  evolution  of  the  community 
alongside its life cycle. 
 

156 

F. Gutierrez et al. 

Fig. 7. Three-node motifs found in each interaction network 

 

5 

Conclusions and Future Work 

This  article  reports  the  effects  of  exposing  two  homogeneous  groups  of  university 
students to two different participation strategies in a partially virtual community over 
a  period  of  15  weeks.  We  aimed  to  motivate  contributions  in  the  first  scenario  by 
stressing the value of the quantity of contributions, and enhancing the quality of the 
contributions in the second scenario. We comparatively analyzed the activity within 
both groups in terms of: (1) participation metrics, (2) structural network metrics, and 
(3) 3-node motifs that reflect the interaction among members. 

Even  if  we  got  some  relevant  observations  regarding  how  participation  can  be 
triggered in terms of quantity and quality, it is worth recognizing that neither of both 
strategies was perfect. In the case of the first scenario, the group tended to follow a 
snowball  effect,  where  publishing  new  contributions  and  generating  traffic  became 
the center of the community, rather than the interaction itself. In the second case, the 
community  tended  to  split  into  two  subgroups  that  interacted  independently. 
Considering these results,  we can say that the participation  strategy clearly affected 
the community structure and the interaction patterns among its members. 

By  analyzing  the  different  structural  network  metrics,  and  more  precisely,  by 
having a visualization that displays the dynamics of group generation over time, we 
can get a first idea on how the community evolves, and also if it is necessary to install 
some control mechanisms to prevent the community from breaking into independent 
subgroups. In other terms, this kind of analysis can be used for designing strategies to 
monitor (in real-time) the dynamics of a community alongside its life cycle. Another 
alternative  for  monitoring  the  activity  in  the  community  is  analyzing  how  the 
community is structured in terms of motifs, which reflect the inner interaction patterns 
within the group. 

 

Analyzing Two Participation Strategies in an Undergraduate Course Community 

157 

There  are  two  major  limitations  in  this  study.  First,  we  modeled  the  interaction 
network as a directed weighted graph. However, the presented motif classes are based 
on  directed  unweighted  graphs.  Therefore,  in  the  case  of  detecting  weighted  edges 
that outnumber the  frequency of a particular  motif class,  we  would need to analyze 
further  in  detail  the  resulting  patterns  and  eventually  decide  if  they  need  to  be 
considered as independent objects. Thus, the global motif distribution of the network 
would  be  altered.  Second,  some  of  the  presented  observations  might  be  due  to  the 
differences in the two even homogeneous  groups of students. These limitations  will 
be further analyzed in a second stage of this study. 

As  future  work,  we  are  currently  studying  how  we  can  refine  the  second 
participation strategy, in order to better understand the interaction patterns within the 
community when quality becomes a structural issue in the group activity. In addition, 
we will carry further experimentation in order to understand how the different triads 
can be understood as a measure of social cohesion within the network. Finally, we are 
analyzing which are the correct metrics to consider when monitoring the evolution of 
a community alongside its life cycle, and how to design visualizations aiming to help 
community managers understand the dynamics of an online community in real-time. 
 
Acknowledgments. This work has been partially supported by the Fondecyt Project 
(Chile), grant: 1120207. The work of Francisco Gutierrez has been supported by the 
Conicyt (Chile) Ph.D. scholarship. 

References 

1.  Butler, B.S.: Membership Size, Communication Activity and Sustainability: The Internal 

Dynamics of Networked Social Structures. Inf. System Research 12(4), 356–362 (2001) 

2.  Cheng,  R.,  Vassileva,  J.:  User  Motivation  and  Persuasion  Strategy  for  Peer-to-Peer 

Communities. In: Proc. of the 38th HICSS, Hawaii, United States (2005) 

3.  Cheng, R., Vassileva, J.: Design and Evaluation of an Adaptive Incentive Mechanism for 
Sustained  Educational  Online  Communities.  User  Modeling  and  User-Adapted 
Interaction 16(3), 321–348 (2006) 

4.  Dabbish,  L.,  Farzan,  R.,  Kraut,  R.,  Postmes,  T.:  Fresh  Faces  in  the  Crowd:  Turnover, 
Identity, and Commitment in Online Groups. In: Proc. of the CSCW 2012, Seattle, USA 
(2012) 

5.  D’Andrea, A., Ferri, F., Grifoni, P.: An Overview of Methods for Virtual Social Networks 
Analysis.  In:  Abraham,  A.,  Hassanien,  A.-E.,  Snasel,  V.  (eds.)  Computational  Social 
Network Analysis: Trends, Tools and Research Advances. Springer, Heidelberg (2009) 

6.  Davies, J., Graff, M.: Performance in e-Learning: Online Participation and Student Grades. 

British Journal of Educational Technology 36(4), 657–663 (2003) 

7.  Gutierrez, F., Baloian, N., Zurita, G.: Boosting Participation in Virtual Communities. In: 
Vivacqua,  A.S.,  Gutwin,  C.,  Borges,  M.R.S.  (eds.)  CRIWG  2011.  LNCS,  vol. 6969,  pp. 
14–29. Springer, Heidelberg (2011) 

8.  Gutierrez,  F.,  Baloian,  N.,  Ochoa,  S.F.,  Zurita,  G.:  Designing  the  Software  Support  for 
Partially  Virtual  Communities.  In:  Herskovic,  V.,  Hoppe,  H.U.,  Jansen,  M.,  Ziegler,  J. 
(eds.) CRIWG 2012. LNCS, vol. 7493, pp. 73–88. Springer, Heidelberg (2012) 

158 

F. Gutierrez et al. 

9.  Hammond,  M.:  A  Review  of  Recent  Papers  on  Online  Discussion  in  Teaching  and 

Learning in Higher Education. J. of Asynchronous Learning Networks 9(3), 9–23 (2005) 

10.  Harper,  F.M.,  Xin  Li,  S.,  Chen,  Y.,  Konstan,  J.A.:  Social  Comparisons  to  Motivate 
Contributions to an Online Community. In: de Kort, Y.A.W., IJsselsteijn, W.A., Midden, 
C.,  Eggen,  B.,  Fogg,  B.J.  (eds.)  PERSUASIVE  2007.  LNCS,  vol. 4744,  pp.  148–159. 
Springer, Heidelberg (2007) 

11.  Harrer,  A.,  Malzahn,  N.,  Zeini,  S.,  Hoppe,  U.:  Combining  social  network  analysis  with 
semantic relations to support the evolution of a scientific community. In: Proc. of the 8th 
Int. Conf. on Comp.-Supported Collab. Learning (CSCL 2007), New Jersey, USA (2007) 

12.  Janzik,  L.,  Herstatt,  C.:  Innovation  Communities:  Motivation  and  Incentives  for 
to  Contribute.  In:  4th  IEEE  International  Conference  on 

Community  Members 
Management of Innovation and Technology (ICMIT 2008), Bangkok, Thailand (2008) 

13.  Kashtan, N., Itzkovitz, S., Milo, R., Alon, U.: Efficient Sampling Algorithm for Estimating 
Sub-graph  Concentrations  and  Detecting  Network  Motifs.  Bioinformatics 20(11),  
1746–1758 (2004) 

14.  Kim,  A.J.:  Community  Building  on  the  Web:  Secret  Strategies  for  Successful  Online 

Communities. Peachpit Press, Berkeley (2000) 

15.  de Laat, M., Lally, V., Lipponen, L., Simons, R.: Investigating patterns of interaction in 
networked  learning  and  computer-supported  collaborative  learning:  A  role  for  Social 
Network Analysis. Int. J. of Comp.-Supported Collaborative Learning 2(1), 87–103 (2007) 
16.  Martinez,  A.,  Dimitriadis,  Y.,  Gomez,  E.,  Rubia,  B.,  Jorrin,  I.,  Marcos,  J.:  Studying 
participation  networks  in  collaboration  using  mixed  methods.  International  Journal  of 
Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning 1(3), 383–408 (2006) 

17.  Martyn,  M.A.:  Using  Interaction  in  Online  Discussion  Boards.  Educause  Quarterly 4, 

 61–62 (2005) 

18.  Newman, M.E.J.: Networks: An Introduction. Oxford University Press (2010) 
19.  Ochoa, S.F., Pino, J.A., Baloian, N., Antunes, P., Herskovic, V.: Some Observations from 
the  Analysis  of  an  Online  Discussion  Board.  In:  Proc.  of  the  SMC  2012,  Seoul,  Korea 
(2012) 

20.  Preece,  J.,  Shneiderman,  B.:  The  Reader-to-Leader  Framework:  Motivating  TechnologyMediated 
Social Participation. AIS Trans. on Human-Comp. Interact. 1(1), 13–32 (2009) 

21.  Raban,  D.,  Moldovan,  M.,  Jones,  Q.:  An  Empirical  Study  of  Critial  Mass  and  Online 

Community Survival. In: Proc. of the CSCW 2010, Savannah, United States (2010) 

22.  Reffay, C., Teplovs, C., Blondel, F.: Productive re-use of CSCL data and analytic tools to 
provide  a  new  perspective  on  group  cohesion.  In:  Proc.  of  the  9th  Int.  Conference  on 
Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL 2011), Hong Kong, China (2011)  

23.  Scott, J.G.: Social Network Analysis. Sage Publications (2012) 
24.  Vonderwell,  S.,  Zachariah,  S.:  Factors  that  Influence  Participation  in  Online  Learning. 

Journal of Research on Technology in Education 38(2), 213–230 (2005) 

25.  Wang,  F.-Y.,  Zeng,  D.,  Carley,  K.M.,  Kao,  W.:  Social  Computing:  From  Social 

Informatics to Social Intelligence. IEEE Intelligent Systems 22(2), 79–83 (2007) 

26.  Wasserman,  S.,  Faust,  K.:  Social  Network  Analysis:  Methods  and  Applications. 

Cambridge University Press (1994) 

27.  Wellman,  B.:  For  a  Social  Network  Analysis  of  Computer  Networks:  A  Sociological 
Perspective on Collaborative Work and Virtual Community. In: Proc. of the 1996 ACM 
SIGCPR/SIGMIS Conf. on Computer Personnel Research, Denver, United States (1996) 

28.  Westerlund, M., Rajala, R., Nykänen, K., Järvensivu, T.: Trust and Commitment in Social 
Networking – Lessons Learned from Two Empirical Studies. In: Proceedings of the 25th 
IMP Conference, Marseille, France (2009) 

