 

Supporting Informal Interaction in a Hospital through 

Impromptu Social Networking 

Alberto L. Morán1, Juan Rodríguez-Covili2, David Mejia3,4, Jesus Favela3,  

and Sergio Ochoa2 

1 Facultad de Ciencias, UABC, Ensenada, Mexico 

alberto.moran@uabc.edu.mx  

2 Department of Computer Science, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile 

{jrodrigu,sochoa}@dcc.uchile.cl 

3 Department of Computer Science, CICESE, Ensenada, Mexico 

favela@cicese.mx 

4 Centro de Ingeniería y Tecnología, UABC, Tijuana, Mexico 

damejia@uabc.edu.mx  

Abstract. Social networking systems allow users to keep in touch with relatives 
and friends in the absence of physical proximity. These tools are also increasingly 
 supporting  productive  interactions  in  diverse  working  environments.  In 
this paper, based on the understanding of informal communication in hospitals, 
we identify opportunities for the use of social networking software in support of 
hospital work. This has inspired the design of meetU, a tool aimed at supporting 
impromptu social networking through an ad-hoc communication infrastructure. 
The services offered by the system are illustrated through interaction scenarios, 
which were also used to evaluate the system with a group of medical interns.  

Keywords:  Mobile  Workers 
Impromptu Social Networking, Hospital Work. 

Interaction,  Social  Networking  Systems,  

1   Introduction 

Hospital  settings  offer  a  prolific  area  to  study  mobile  collaborative  work.  Medical 
activities in hospitals are characterized by the need for coordination and collaboration 
among specialists with different areas of expertise, an intense information exchange, 
the  integration  of  data  from  many  devices  or  artifacts,  and  the  mobility  of  hospital 
staff, patients, documents and equipment [24]. Additionally, a hospital can be considered 
as an information space that is “navigated” by the staff in order to get the information 
 and  resources  required  to  accomplish  work  [3],  since  most  hospital  staff 
moves continuously to access people, knowledge, and resources [1]. 

Hospital workers are also in frequent need to locate colleagues. A physician might 
require the opinion of a specialist to confirm a diagnosis; a nurse might need to contact 
the doctor in charge of a patient who has been experimenting discomfort or pain; 
a resident physician might just need a couple of free hands to conduct an intervention. 
This type of interactions has been supported by casual, informal or lightweight communication 
mechanisms and social awareness [19, 31]. 

G. Kolfschoten, T. Herrmann, and S. Lukosch (Eds.): CRIWG 2010, LNCS 6257, pp. 305–320, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 

306 

A.L. Morán et al. 

By informal communication we mean those interactions that do not have a predefined 
schedule or place of encounter, that are spontaneous, brief, and where the topic 
of the conversation can change during the course of the interaction [19]. This type of 
communication has proved to be very important to accomplish work because it contributes 
to the social and production functions of the group [8, 16, 18]. Unfortunately, 
informal  spontaneous  communication  comes  at  a  cost:  interruptions  [7].  To  date, 
several mechanisms have been designed to deal with interruptions, which mostly rely 
on the provision of social awareness [6, 7, 21]. 

By social awareness we refer to the basic knowledge that provides an overview of 
the  social  context  where  the  situation  arises:  what  is  happening,  who  is  around, 
whether others are relatively busy or can be engaged, who is talking to whom, who I 
can work or communicate with, and which other activities are occurring [4, 12, 31]. 

Based on these concepts, several models and systems have been proposed to provide 
support for informal communication and social awareness  mostly based on the 
provision  of  artificial  proximity  in  place  of  physical  proximity.  Examples  include: 
VideoWindow  and  Cruiser  [19],  Piazza  [15],  Hubbub  [14]  and  Aware  Phone  [2]. 
However, since hospital workers perform activities both while at a base location and 
while moving around the hospital [1], they require continuous (and interchangeable) 
support for both modes of work. For this reason, these tools are not adequate for such 
setting.  Further,  at-the-base  and  on-the-move  work  seems  to  change  the  rules  and 
requirements for the provision of support for informal interaction in hospital work. 

In order to understand how informal communication in settings such as hospitals, 
could be better supported, we conducted a field study in the area of internal medicine 
of a mid-size public hospital [1]. This study helped us identify design insights aimed 
at informing the design of tools for supporting co-located informal communication in 
a working environment with local mobility [22].  

In this paper, we aim at investigating the use of social networking tools in support 
for  hospital  work.  We  conducted  an  additional  study  and  analyzed  the  data  of  the 
former observational study to uncover opportunities for this technology and to understand 
 how  social  networking  systems  can  be  designed  and  deployed  to  support  
informal interaction and work activities in this type of environment. The next section 
provides  a  brief  introduction  to  social  networking  systems  and  some  of  its  current 
uses in hospital work. In Section 3 we present the results of the workplace study from 
which design scenarios and insights are derived. Section 4 introduces the concept of 
Impromptu Social Networking (ISN) and describes the design of meetU a mobile tool 
developed  on  top  of  a  mobile  ad-hoc  communications  infrastructure.  Section  5  presents 
the results of a preliminary evaluation of the concept. In Section 6 we present 
related work, and summarize and conclude in Section 7. 

2   Social Networking Sites 

Social  Network  Sites  (SNSs)  are  attracting  millions  of  users  worldwide.  Sites  like 
Facebook,  and  MySpace,  for example,  have  millions  of  registered  users  and  are  increasing 
their membership [17]. On these sites people present themselves via profile 
pages, establish ties with other users, communicate between them via text and voice 
messages, and interact with each other via optional leisure applications [24]. 

 

  Supporting Informal Interaction in a Hospital through Impromptu Social Networking 

307 

Concerning use, [20] found that SNSs are used for i) social searching –finding out 
information  about  people  they  have  met  offline-,  and  for  ii)  social  browsing  –using 
the SNS to develop new connections, perhaps with the aim of interacting with them 
offline. Further, [1] identifies three additional uses: i) “Looking at”, which intends to 
know  more about people  met offline (similar to  social browsing [20]), ii) “Looking 
up”,  which  intends  to  search  for  people  to  meet  offline  (similar  to  social  searching 
[20]), and iii) “Keeping up with People”, which intends to maintain weak connections 
with people met offline. 

SNSs have also been classified as being Open or Work SNSs [10]. Open SNSs allow 
users from anywhere in the Internet, while Work SNSs refer to those that are used 
within an enterprise intranet by professional workers. 

Professional workers use internal SNSs to build stronger bonds with their weak ties 
and to reach out to employees they do not know [10]. The main motivations for that 
use were i) caring - workers enjoyed connecting socially at work, both to those they 
work or may work with, and those they do not know; ii) climbing - they felt the use of 
the work SNS was or could specifically assist them in their personal career advancement;
 and iii) campaigning - they used the SNS to solicit support for their ideas and to 
drive traffic to their project web pages, which they saw as a means to move forward 
with their ideas. 

Concerning the use of these tools in hospitals, some have started using and adopting 
 them  as  communication  tools  for  “hard  to  reach”  groups  in  their  area.  For  
instance, NHS hospital trusts in the UK are using Twitter1 as a service for the communication 
of press releases, awareness messages and updates, such as “cancelation 
of the services due to bad weather” [11]. They currently consider Twitter as “an auxiliary 
communication channel”.  

Given  the  features  of  SNSs,  and  the  evidence  of  its  use  as  communication  tools 
with users outside the hospital, we set to find how SNSs can be used to provide support 
to workers within the hospital. Although there could be more than one candidate 
community, we will concentrate on Medical Interns (MI), due to the specific characteristics 
of this community. 

Medical interns are considered physicians-in-training; they provide the most hours 
of patient care in the unit and are in constant movement. In the area of internal medicine,
 where we did the observations, each intern is responsible for the care of five or 
six patients. One of their main responsibilities is to create clinical histories whenever 
a new patient arrives at the hospital. They are also responsible for providing care and 
following-up on patients during their stay in the hospital.  

Further, medical interns are in the process of adapting to the hospital environment. 
For  one  full  year  they  get  their  first  experiences  with  the  feelings  associated  to  the 
loose of a patient, making a mistake, receiving a disciplinary action and the constant 
supervision  from  specialists,  nurses  and  the  director  of  the  intern  program.  In  addition,
 they spend most of their time in the hospital. They work daily shifts of 8 hours 
with a one-hour break, and every three days they have to work an extended 32-hour 
shift (medical ward). Under these conditions hospital work becomes a major part of 
their  life,  certainly  more  than  what  most  professionals/students  experience.  Finally, 
most medical interns come from other cities to do their internship. Results of a survey 

                                                           
1 Twitter: www.twitter.com 

 

308 

A.L. Morán et al. 

we applied to 36 medical interns reveal that  when they arrive they barely know  the 
city, and have no relatives or friends, other than the dozen or so fellow interns with 
whom they studied before initiating their internship. These conditions require medical 
interns to develop a strong sense of belonging to their community within the hospital. 
Medical interns also experience an interesting duality as students and professionals,
 they are evaluated as part of their professional education, and their work is a crucial 
part of the hospital’s operation. This duality combined with the confidence they 
gather throughout their internship, exposes them to situations where the support of the 
group or social network they belong to helps them sort out a diversity of issues that 
arise in their daily work. 

3   Understanding the Work Social Networks of Medical Interns 

To  better  understand  the  characteristics  of  the  social  networks  that  medical  interns 
belong to, we performed a preliminary study at the internal medicine area of a local 
hospital. In this section we present the major findings of the study, as well as an ensemble 
of use scenarios. 

The study included two stages. In stage one we surveyed current and former medical 
interns from a local hospital. The participants in this stage were 36 medical interns (26 
currently in their internship and 10 who just finished a few months ago). Their average 
age is 23 years old. The results show that all the medical interns know at least one social 
networking system and that 94% of them use at least one of them. Using a five-point 
Likert-scale, we identified that medical interns found social network systems very useful 
 for  social  activities  and  just  useful  for  productive  activities.  Most  of  them  (89%) 
have been registered in one or more of these sites for at least one year. Moreover, all of 
them  log  into  these  sites  at  least  once  a  month,  and  17%  of  them  do  this  every  day. 
These results encouraged us to propose the use of SNSs to support hospital work and to 
deal with some breakdowns in informal communication in such settings.  

Stage  two  consisted  of  a  further  analysis  of  observational  data  from  a  previous 
study, originally performed to understand informal interactions in hospital work [1]. 
Described  briefly,  the  methodology  consisted  in  collecting  data  through  the  nonparticipatory 
observations of ten medical workers including five physicians and five 
medical interns during two complete working shifts. In this second stage, we decided 
to place special emphasis on understanding how local mobility influences the interactions 
 experienced  by  medical  interns,  and  how  their  offline  social  networks  affect 
those  interactions  while  contributing  to  the  completion  and  achievement  of  their 
work. For this, the second analysis aimed at having a good sample of interactions and 
capturing  the  communication  instances  in  which  those  workers  are  involved,  along 
with their social networks, as they conduct their work, including details with respect 
to  the  nature  of  the  actions,  artifacts  used,  contents  of  conversations  and  physical 
location of individuals, among others. 

3.1   Application Scenarios for Social Networking in a Hospital 

As  a  result  of  stage  two  of  this  study,  we  identified  use  scenarios  that  exemplify  a 
distinct  and  typical  use  for  a  socially-aware  support  system.  The  scenarios  were 

 

  Supporting Informal Interaction in a Hospital through Impromptu Social Networking 

309 

sketches of user activities that let us translate our findings into specific vignettes that 
captured facets of how socially-aware tools might fit into current work practices. The 
following scenarios illustrate the kind of social network support hospital work might 
benefit from and give a flavor of how this technology can enhance hospital practices. 

Scenario  1.  Juan,  a  medical  intern,  reviews  the  healthcare  record  of  a  patient  just 
before  the  ward  round  usually  begins.  In  order  not  to  miss  it,  he  indicates  in  his 
mobile  phone  that  he  wants  to  be  notified  when  the  status  of  any  of  his  colleagues 
changes  to  “starting  ward  round”  (see  Fig.  1A).  Ten  minutes  later  the  physician  in 
charge initiates the ward round and Pedro (another MI) updates his status to indicate 
this by selecting the appropriate icon in the “set status” window (see Fig. 1B). At this 
moment, Juan receives the notification (see Fig. 1C) and he joins the ward round. 

meetU

Request status notification

From

Select event

Select contact

meetU

8:25 am  Starting
Ward Round!

8:12 am Got a coffee

7:59 am Going for a
coffee

Request 

Cancel

Read 

Cancel

 

                       (A) 

                                   (B) 

                (C) 

Fig. 1. (A) Requesting notification, (B) Update status, (C) On receiving notification 

In this scenario, based on the actions of one of the medical interns participating in 
the ward round, valuable information is generated so that a notification regarding the 
actual  event  “Starting  Ward  round”  could  be  generated  and  delivered  to  another 
medical  intern.  The  additional  value  of  this  notification  resides  in  that  without  this 
information, the medical intern could miss the start of the ward round and get a scolding 
or even a report from the physician in charge of the intern’s program.  

Furthermore,  in  this  case  the  medical  intern  explicitly  updates  his  status,  but  in 
some instances the system could potentially use contextual information to do it automatically.
 For example, an intern that stays in the cafeteria for more than five minutes 
at a certain time of the day (e.g. at Noon) could highly accurately be estimated to be 
having lunch. Previous work has established that activity estimation can be achieved 
with an accuracy of up to 90% when the location, time, companions and artifacts used 
by a medical worker are known [29], but even simple rules could be set to indentify 
some activities  with a high degree of accuracy. To simplify the indication of a new 
state to the user, the interface shows a number of icons with common activities, such 
as in ward round, out to lunch, writing medical notes, as shown in Fig. 1B. When the 

 

310 

A.L. Morán et al. 

user selects one of the icons, the corresponding text is displayed allowing the user to 
provide additional explanation. 

Scenario 2. Juan is a MI and his parents will visit him this weekend. However, Juan 
remembers that he has a 32-hour shift this Saturday and is concerned that he won’t be 
able  to  see  them.  Not  knowing  whom  to  ask  for  help;  he  enters  into  the  Social 
Networking System on his mobile phone and sends the message: "Juan's parents are 
coming  to  visit  him  this  weekend,  but  he  has  an  extended  32-hour  work  shift  this 
Saturday  :-("  (see  Fig.  2.A).  Several  of  his  fellow  MI's  receive  the  message  and 
respond  with  empathy  messages.  Miguel,  another  MI,  replies  with:  “Hey  …  Sergio 
might  be  interested  in  changing  his  shift  to  that  day”  (see  Fig.  2.B),  Miguel  knows 
that  Sergio  (another  MI)  is  free  that  weekend,  and  might  be  interested  in  switching 
shifts with Juan. Through Miguel’s profile page, Juan accesses Sergio’s profile page 
and  contacts  him  through  the  SNS’s  chat  to  ask  him  if  he  could  take  his  shift  on 
Saturday. 

 

meetU

9:59 am. Hey! … Sergio
might be interested in a
ward change  for that day
8:25 am. That’s too bad … 
Are you looking for a ward
change?
8:07 am. Sorry to hear
that Juan! …

(A) 

 

Read

Cancel

  

(B)

Fig. 2.  Updating  the  status  with a  custom  message  (A),  and  Receiving  a  reply  from  a  friend 
with a suggested solution to the expressed problem (B) 

In this scenario, updating the status of one member of the social network provides 
lightweight means of communicating the problem faced by the MI. This in turn generates 
an ensemble of answers, even including one with a possible unrequested solution 
 to  the  MI’s  problem.  Additionally,  the  seamless  access  to  the  profile  of  other 
MI’s and shared communication channel (the chat tool) through the SNS are essential 
to solve the MI’s problem. 

 

Scenario 3. The physician is in his office reviewing the record of a patient when he 
decides  to  leave  an  indication  to  the  nurse  in  charge  of  this  patient  during  the  next 
shift. He does not know who she is, so he pulls out his mobile phone and accesses the 
SNS (see Fig. 3.A). On the map of the ward shown, he clicks on the bed where the 
patient  is  and  the  names  of  the  medical  personnel  in  charge  appear.  The  physician 

 

  Supporting Informal Interaction in a Hospital through Impromptu Social Networking 

311 

selects the name of the nurse and leaves a voice message for her. When the nurse is 
near the Nursing station she notices that she has a pending message through the FlowerBlink 
ambient display (see Fig. 3.B). The nurse accesses her SNS’s message center 
and listens to the message. At that time, the physician receives a notification indicating 
that his message has been read.  

 

meetU

 

(A) 

(B)

 

Fig.  3.  Leaving  a  message  to  a  nurse  (A)  and  Notification  delivery  by  means  of  the  FlowerBlink 
ambient display 

This scenario illustrates how subtle notification in the intensive working environment 
of the hospital could be achieved through an ambient display in the form of an 
artificial  flower bowl that lights on  when a person  with a  pending  message is in its 
proximity [30]. Also, the scenario illustrates how the SNS and the hospital information 
systems could be integrated to achieve this kind of notifications. 

3.2   Requirements of a Social Networking Infrastructure 

As illustrated by the scenarios, hospital work has certain characteristics that shape the 
way in which hospital personal communicates and collaborates. Work is performed in 
the  following  context:  (a)  distributed  personnel  moving  around  work  zones  that  are 
physically  close  (local  mobility);  (b)  mobile  workers  performing  tasks  in  which  the 
current status of their activity is relevant to their colleagues; (c) people that want to 
share  social  information  and  collaborate  on-demand  with  their  colleagues;  and  (d) 
existence of no time-critical social activities, such as those illustrated in the scenarios, 
which although time-sensible, do not affect the patients’ care if the MI’s delay their 
execution a little. 

In the mobile work scenarios we have, such as hospital healthcare or construction inspection 
 activities  [28],  a  social  component  may  also  help  to  improve  collaborative 
work, providing an informal communication channel that allows workers to coordinate 

 

312 

A.L. Morán et al. 

(e.g.  changing  turns,  assigning  work  areas,  using  work  resources,  showing  awareness 
about others), and generate informal conversations, messaging and discussions that can 
be also relevant for the  main  work purposes (patients’ care). Also, in these settings it 
might  be  difficult  to  deploy  networking  infrastructure.  In  the  case  of  the  hospital,  in 
addition to the considerable paperwork required to obtain the necessary permits to install 
networking equipment, there are problems related to deployment and maintenance 
costs, including the creation of a new work role, that of the network technician, which 
makes it less feasible. 

Based on these requirements, in the next section we present our initial proposal to 

develop a social networking infrastructure to support mobile work. 

4   meetU: A MANET-Based Social Networking System 

Mobile  Ad  hoc  Networks  (MANETs)  offer  several  advantages  as  a  communication 
platform to support loosely coupled collaborative activities in mobile work scenarios 
[5,  28,  22].  In  those  contexts,  MANETs  can  create  a  communication  mesh  to  exchange 
data among participating devices, so that applications do not need to rely on a 
fixed  communication  infrastructure,  such  as  a  distributed  network  of  access  points, 
thus eliminating  the need  for an initial  investment on  the  networking infrastructure, 
and on its later maintenance. 

Previously, the authors have proposed an application level routing protocol based 
on  IEEE  801.11  standards.  The  protocol,  named  High  Level  MANET  Protocol 
(HLMP) [26], allows automatically  setting and keeping a  MANET. Its implementation 
 can  be  used  by  groupware  systems  through  an  Application  Programming  
Interface (API) that provides a set of services required by mobile collaborative environments 
deployed on top of a MANET, reducing the effort involved in the development 
of this type of applications [27]. The library interface keeps the abstraction of 
the  communication  processes  by  using  a  message  exchange  paradigm  and  an  event 
delivery method. It also provides useful information about the network structure to the 
applications,  including  changes  and  current  status.  This  information  can  be  used  to 
implement awareness mechanisms for mobile workers. Further details about the implementation 
of the library are provided elsewhere [27]. 

meetU  is  a  mobile  collaborative  social  system  developed  using  the  HLMP  API. 
This system implements  what we named an Impromptu Social Network (ISN) infrastructure 
that supports collaboration among mobile workers in a hospital. An ISN is 
an  informal  and  distributed  interaction  space,  which  is  used  by  mobile  workers  belonging 
to an organization to support their daily activities. The meetU social network 
system  is  available  through  the  users’  mobile  devices  and  it  provides  not  only  user 
interaction services but also social and emotional awareness to mobile workers. 

When using meetU at the hospital, workers are able to establish ties with their colleagues,
  coordinate  their  activities  and  collaborate  in  order  to  perform  a  particular 
task. Some of the advantages of implementing this application on a MANET are the 
following: (a) this communication system is independent of the hospital information 
and communication  infrastructure, therefore  formal authorization permissions  to deploy 
 it  and  use  it  is  facilitated;  (b)  it  is  an  automated  and  easy  to  deploy  network, 
which eliminates initial deployment and maintenance costs; (c) users typically trust an 

 

  Supporting Informal Interaction in a Hospital through Impromptu Social Networking 

313 

informal interaction system that is not centralized, and thus not visible to managers; 
and (d) peer-to-peer communication allows each person to limit or allow the access of 
remote users to his/her social information. 

Fig. 4 presents an example of meetU deployment, including two main communication 
zones within the hospital setting. The first case represents a “low density” zone 
(zone  A),  as  there  are  no  direct  links  between  all  users;  therefore  communication 
between  some  users  (e.g.  1  and  3)  transparently  goes  through  an  intermediate  node 
(e.g. the device of user 2) to allow them to interact. The second case (i.e. zone B) is 
denser than the former due to the physical proximity of the users, which allows direct 
links among them all. Thus they can directly interact and exchange messages.  

Fig. 4. Example of meetU usage at a hospital 

 

Further,  since  both  zones  are  disjoint  (i.e.  there  are  no  links  between  them),  if  a 
user from zone A (e.g. user 1) wants to send a message to a colleague in zone B (e.g 
user 7), synchronous communication is not possible. For such cases, meetU provides 
a  communication  service  named  gossip  messaging,  which  allows  an  intermediary 
mobile user to transparently transport and deliver an asynchronous message between 
two  unreachable  users  [13].  Typically,  these  messages  try  to  promote  situations  in 
which users could interact synchronously, or try to communicate status updates that 
could originate opportunistic encounters. For example, the messages could be: “please 
call me to my cell phone”, “I need to talk to you, I will be at neonatology at 10 am”, 
or status updates such as: “I’m going out for a coffee”, or “Starting ward round”. 

In  the  situation  depicted  in  Fig.  4,  the  medical  intern  (4)  moves  from  zone  A  to 
zone B (denoted by the dashed arrow), hence meetU can automatically take advantage 
of her mobility and use her device as a message transport. For her it will be transparent 
that the system is using her device to support this interaction; therefore such activity 
is not disruptive for the users. 

4.1   Architecture 

Fig. 5 shows the meetU architecture, which includes the components that allow social 
interactions  between  users  via  text  or  voice  messages,  user  awareness  mechanisms 
and resource sharing. The application architecture is fully distributed; this means that 

 

314 

A.L. Morán et al. 

the whole infrastructure is replicated in every mobile device that forms the ISN. The 
components hosted in a particular device can interact with components in other mobile 
devices through the HLMP Sub-protocols (i.e. using the message structure definition 
and the events triggered by the API) or the gossip mechanisms. 

 

Fig. 5. Architecture of meetU 

 

The profile of every user is  updated through events of the MANET. Such events 
are  exchanged  among  users  status  components  hosted  in  each  device,  and  indicate 
changes in the social network; e.g. a user joint or left the network, a user changed her 
status, etc. It is the responsibility of the HLMP Communication component to transport 
and deliver such messages. The data conforming the status of a mobile user in-
cludes:  (1)  user  location  inside  the  hospital  (estimated  by  an  autonomous  software 
module),  (2)  user  movement  (manually  configured  or  predicted  based  on  the  user’s 
location  history  information),  (3)  user  activity  (estimated  from  information  such  as 
user location and time of day or explicitly provided by the user), (4) management of 
shared resources (where the users can create and manage shared files such as pictures, 
videos or documents), and (5) management of user profile (where the user can configure 
social information and its accessibility). 

4.2   System Behavior 

We now describe how the components of the architecture communicate to support the 
described  functionality.  A  sequence  diagram  of  the  status  notification  procedure  is 
shown in Fig. 6. Usually, a user requests a notification (as in scenario 1), in order to 
become  aware  of  when  certain  status  or  condition  is  reported  by  a  colleague.  The 
petition is sent to the Users  Status component. When  updates on the information of 
another user match the requested status type, the component triggers back a notification 
to the GUI.  

On the other hand, if a user changes his status in the meetU system using a new 
category,  e.g.  “Starting  ward  round”,  the  new  information  is  updated  on  his  Users 
Status component and then settled in the “I’m alive” message of HLMP. This kind of 
message is constantly sent via multicast to the MANET by the communication engine,  
 

 

  Supporting Informal Interaction in a Hospital through Impromptu Social Networking 

315 

Fig. 6. Sequence diagram of meetU status notification 

 

in order to propagate the device existence, user’s network data, and profile information.
 The message is then received by the rest of the devices connected to the HLMP 
network,  updating  the  colleague’s  profile  with  the  attached  status,  and  triggering  a 
notification when it is required. 

5   Evaluating the Perceived Usefulness of meetU 

Aimed at evaluating the use of social networks and ubiquitous computing technology 
for  supporting  activities  and  communication  of  medical  workers,  we  conducted  a 
focus group session. This evaluation focused on one of the two main factors influencing 
 technology  adoption  [9]:  perceived  usefulness.  The  focus  group  was  conducted 
with three medical interns and was aimed at understanding how well social networks 
help to support their productive and social activities that require communication with 
other colleagues. The purpose of this session was to test and improve our design by 
focusing  on  the  way  in  which  medical  interns  communicate  with  others  asynchronously,
 mainly due to unavailability of the collaborator or in absence of a communication 
channel (physical or artificial proximity). 

5.1   Focus Group 

The  focus  group  was  conducted  in  a  room  with  a  meeting  table.  We  used  a  voice 
recorder  to  capture  all  events  during  the  session.  We  invited  three  medical  interns 
from a public local hospital in Ensenada, Mexico; who are currently performing their 
one  year  internship  and  consequently  are  very  familiar  with  hospital  work  and  its 
routines.  

The session was conducted by one moderator who presented three scenarios using 

a personal computer. The session lasted approximately one hour.  

The session started with an explanation of the “social networks” concept; after that, 
the  moderator presented the  scenarios to  the  medical interns that participated in the 
session; these scenarios illustrated some situations where the use of social networks 
could be helpful to them (medical interns). Each scenario was divided into two parts. 

 

316 

A.L. Morán et al. 

The  first  part  showed  a  “problem”  as  it  currently  happens,  while  the  second  part 
showed our envisioned solution. After each scenario, the medical interns were asked 
to discuss how frequently these scenarios occurred in the hospital and the implications 
of  these  inconveniences  in  their  work  activities.  The  scenarios  presented  are  those 
introduced in section 3.3 for which we foresaw that the application could be useful.  

After  each  scenario,  we  conducted  a  session  of  questions  and  open  discussion 
about the features, advantages and limitations of our proposal. At the end of the presentation 
 of  the  scenarios,  the  medical  interns  were  asked  to  complete  a  survey  that 
helped  us  to  gather  quantitative  information  about  the  design  of  our  proposal.  We 
discuss the results of this evaluation next: 

Scenario  1.  Awareness  of  the  start  of  the  ward  round.  The  three  participants 
completely agreed that scenario 1 occurs at least once a day at the hospital and that it 
has a slight but clearly negative effect on their work. They all agreed that the solution 
presented in the scenario could help their current work and that it would be used in 
the hospital if available.  

Additionally,  they  said  that  this  solution  (specifically  the  notification  of  status 
change) could be used in other scenarios, such as on the transfer of a patient from the 
emergency unit to bed in a ward, to notify when lab results are ready, and to notify 
that a medical worker is available to provide assistance. 

Scenario  2.  Request  an  exchange  of  medical  ward.  The  three  participants 
completely agreed that scenario 2 occurs  one to three times a  month in the hospital 
and that it has  no significant  effect on their  work. They all agreed that the  solution 
presented in the scenario could offer a slight benefit to their current work and that it 
could be used in the hospital if available.  

The main concern with this scenario was privacy, since others could review the information.
  However,  medical  interns  expressed  that  through  the  use  of  adequate 
mechanisms to deal with privacy, this service could be useful to them. Precisely one 
of the motivations for using a MANET-based infrastructure rather than a centralized 
one was to assure that the information won’t be stored, and thus accessible, in a central 
server. 

Scenario 3. Leaving a message for a nurse. As for scenario 1, the three participants 
completely agreed that scenario 3 occurs at least once a week at the hospital and that 
it  has  a  slight  but  clearly  negative  effect  on  their  work.  They  all  agreed  that  the 
solution presented in the scenario could help their current work and that it would be 
used in the hospital if available.  

They mentioned that they currently need to ask other people for the person they are 
looking for or they ask a nurse to look for him, investing precious time in many occasions.
 They would find the tool useful since they often do not know who the nurse in 
charge of a shift is, and “it would make their relationship with nurses more cordial”. 
Also, they suggested including a photograph of the person because they do not always 
know  her by  name and after  sending a  message they  might  meet, and not be aware 
that it was her he sent the message to.  

In summary, all three scenarios  were considered realistic and the interns  found the 
technology useful and easy to use given their previous experience with similar systems. 

 

  Supporting Informal Interaction in a Hospital through Impromptu Social Networking 

317 

6   Related Work 

Related work is revised under two different perspectives. A first perspective relates to 
the use of tools for informal communication in hospital work. One of the main challenges 
 here  is  how  to  allow  communication  while  workers  are  either  at-the-desk  or 
on-the-move. There are works that have mainly provided with the means to establish 
communication  regardless  of  the  location  of  the  user  within  the  premises.  This  has 
been achieved through the provision of artificial proximity tools using text, voice and 
hands-free  communication  on  mobile  devices;  such  is  the  case  of  the  Vocera  Communication 
 Badge2.  Our  proposed    ISN-based  system,  relies  on  the  use  of  a  Smartphone 
and of a MANET to support this kind of communication.  

An additional challenge is how to identify a suitable moment to initiate a conversation 
with a colleague in the hospital. For this, there are works that have taken a con-
text-aware approach to automatically acquire and provide information about the social 
context  of  a  coworker;  such  is  the  case  of  the  AWAREPhone  [2].  In  contrast,  our 
proposal differs in that it takes advantage of the by-product information of the user’s 
participation  in  the  social  network.  This  information  is  created  by  the  ensemble  of 
MIs  through  their  explicit  entries  in  the  ISN,  and  thus  it  provides  information  that 
allows them not only to be aware of the social context but also to act upon it to provide 
an answer, solve a problem, and accomplish work at the same time. 

A  second  perspective  relates  to  the  more  general  use  of  SNSs  for  work.  In  this 
case, the uses of the proposed Impromptu Social Network (ISN) differ from the social 
uses  previously  identified  in  [17]  (i.e.  looking  at,  looking  up,  and  keeping  up  with 
people) and in [20] (i.e. social searching and social browsing), and from the work uses 
identified in [10] (i.e. caring, climbing and campaigning). ISN uses intend to provide 
support  for,  and  are  more  related  to,  informal  interaction  during  work  processes  of 
MIs rather than on maintaining or extending their social network, or on knowing more 
about  co-workers,  or  spreading  and  championing  the  workers’  ideas  and  projects. 
Possible  explanations  for  this  include  that  the  ISN  concept  and  our  ISN-based  tool 
have been conceived to support informal interaction and its functions at work [16, 19, 
24], and that its initial implementation takes advantage of a MANET-based infrastructure,
  which  is  not  provided  nor  managed  by  the  organization,  thus  providing  users 
with a sense of ownership and trust given its distributed and unmanaged nature. We 
are not aware of other similar uses of SNS in the context of hospital work. 

7   Discussion and Conclusions 

One of the main characteristics of social networks is that they provide social information 
regarding users that could be utilized by others to strength social relationships or 
to initiate collaboration. This seems to be one of the reasons for the growth of social 
networking  systems  (SNS)  to  support  productive  activities  in  collaborative  working 
environments. 

Based on the results of an observational study that  we previously conducted in a 
hospital,  we  identified  some  situations  where  social  networking  services  could  be 

                                                           
2 http://www.vocera.com 

 

318 

A.L. Morán et al. 

particularly  useful, especially to support  medical interns’ activities, considering that 
most of them are already users of social networking software, and that being new to 
the environment, might not be aware of the resources at their disposal (including both 
colleagues  and  artifacts).  Indeed,  the  medical  interns  that  participated  in  the  study 
have an offline informal social network that is used to support their work activities. 

Thus,  in  this  paper  we  introduce  the  concept  of  an  Impromptu  Social  Network 
(ISN),  an  informal  distributed  ad-hoc  interaction  space,  which  is  used  by  workers 
with local mobility to support their daily activities. Based on this concept we developed 
meetU, a tool that combines some of the main characteristics of social network 
systems and a set of pervasive services such as location estimation of users, awareness 
of use of artifacts, activity estimation and awareness of potential collaborators. 
meetU  is  implemented  on  top  of  the  HLMP  protocol,  providing  a  lightweight  communication 
infrastructure that can be easily deployed while offering privacy assurance 
to its  users. The characteristics of this and similar  working environments, including 
constant  user  mobility,  the  practical  difficulties  of  deploying  a  fixed  infrastructure, 
and the use of awareness of current activities to coordinate work, highlights the advantages 
of using an ad-hoc network to implement an ISN system such as meetU. 

Potential users found the notification of status change to be useful for a variety of 
applications,  especially  if  the  system  automatically  determines  the  status  of  users; 
since hospital work is event-driven, the occurrence of some events could trigger the 
need to collaborate with others or to switch the task being performed.  

Additionally, participants found it useful to have access to the network of contacts 
to facilitate tasks when users are not aware of their potential collaborators. This situation 
usually happens in the hospital due to the constant rotation of medical staff. Thus, 
the integration of the contact’s network with the hospital information system could be 
particularly  useful  for  working  teams  which  composition  is  continuously  changing 
(e.g. scheduled shift rotation). 

Finally,  concerning  some  of  the  limitations  of  the  conducted  evaluation,  in  this 
case we opted for a focus group scenario-based evaluation with three actual MIs acting 
as experts of the domain (informal communication in hospital work). This allowed 
us  to  validate  the  feasibility  of  our  approach  and  to  determine  the  MIs  perception 
about the proposed tool. Future research should include further evaluation of the Impromptu 
Social Network concept and the proposed meetU tool with a larger number 
of hospital workers, as well as evaluating its actual use in the hospital. 

Acknowledgments 

This work was partially supported by LACCIR under grant No. R0308LAC005 and a 
travel grant provided by LACCIR to the second author, No. S1009LAC001. 

References 

1.  Bardram, J., Bossen, C.: Moving to get aHead: Local Mobility and Collaborative Work. In: 
5th European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (ECSCW), Copenhagen,
 Denmark, pp. 355–374 (2003) 

 

  Supporting Informal Interaction in a Hospital through Impromptu Social Networking 

319 

2.  Bardram,  J.,  Hansen,  T.:  The  AWARE  architecture:  supporting  context-mediated  social 
awareness in mobile cooperation. In: ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work (CSCW 2004), Chicago, USA, pp. 192–201 (2004) 

3.  Bossen, C.: The parameters of common information spaces: The heterogeneity of cooperative 
 work  at  a  hospital  ward.  In:  ACM  conference  on  Computer  Supported  cooperative 
Work (CSCW 2002), New Orleans, USA, pp. 176–185 (2002) 

4.  Carroll, J., Neale, D., Isenhour, P., Rosson, M., McCrickard, D.: Notification and aware-
ness:  synchronizing  task-oriented  collaborative  activity.  International  Journal  of  HumanComputer 
Studies 58(5), 605–632 (2003) 

5.  Corson, S., Macker, J.: Mobile Ad hoc Networking (MANET): Routing Protocol Performance 
Issues and Evaluation Considerations. IETF, RFC 2501 (1999) 

6.  Cutrell, E., Czerwinski, M.H.: Notification, Disruption and Memory: Effects of Messaging 
Interaction  

In:  Human-Computer 

Interruptions  on  Memory  and  Performance. 
(INTERACT), Tokyo, Japan, pp. 263–269 (2001) 

7.  Dabbish, L., Kraut, R.: Controlling Interruptions: Awareness Displays and Social Motivation 
 for  Coordination.  In:  ACM  Conference  on  Computer  Supported  Cooperative  Work 
(CSCW 2004), Chicago, USA, pp. 182–191 (2004) 

8.  Fish, R., Kraut, R., Root, R., Rice, R.: Video as a technology for informal communication. 

Communications of the ACM 36(1), 48–61 (1993) 

9.  Davis,  F.,  Venkatesh,  V.:  A  critical  assessment  of  potential  measurement  biases  in  the 
technology  acceptance  model:  three  experiments.  International  Journal  of  HumanComputer 
Studies 45(1), 19–45 (1996) 

10.  DiMicco, J., Millen, D., Geyer, W., Dugan, C., Brownholtz, B., Muller, M.: Motivations 
for social networking at work. In: ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work (CSCW 2008), San Diego, USA, pp. 711–720 (2008) 

11.  eHealthInsider, February 26 (2009) 
12.  Gutwin, C., Greenberg, S.: Workspace Awareness for Groupware. In: ACM Conference on 

Human Factors in Computing System (CHI), Vancouver, Canada, pp. 208–209 (1996) 

13.  Herskovic, V., Ochoa, S., Pino, J., Neyem, A.: Mobile Collaborative Systems: Behind the 

User Interface. Journal of Universal Computer Science (to appear, 2010) 

14.  Isaacs, E., Walendowski,  A., Ranganthan, D.: Hubbub: a sound-enhanced mobile instant 
messenger that supports awareness and opportunistic interactions. In: ACM Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI), Minneapolis, USA, pp. 179-186 (2002) 

15.  Isaacs,  E.,  Tang,  J.,  Morris,  T.:  Piazza:  A  Desktop  Environment  Supporting  Impromptu 
and Planned Interactions. In: ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work 
(CSCW 1996), Boston, USA, pp. 315–324 (1996) 

16.  Isaacs,  E.,  Whittaker,  S.,  Frohlich,  D.,  O’Conaill,  B.:  Informal  communication  re-
examined:  New  functions  for  video  in  supporting  opportunistic  encounters.  In:  VideoMediated 
Communication. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, New Jersey (1997) 

17.  Joinson, A.: ‘Looking at’, ‘Looking up’ or ‘Keeping up with’ people? Motives and Uses of 
Facebook. In: ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing System (CHI), Florence, 
Italy, pp. 1027–1036 (2008) 

18.  Kraut,  R.,  Streeter,  L.:  Co-ordination  in  software  development.  Communications  of  the 

ACM 38(3), 69–81 (1995) 

19.  Kraut,  R.,  Fish,  R.,  Root,  R.,  Chalfonte,  B.:  Informal  communication  in  organizations: 
form, function and technology. In: The Claremont Symposium on Applied Social Psychology,
 pp. 145–199. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks (1990) 

 

320 

A.L. Morán et al. 

20.  Lampe,  C.,  Ellison,  N.,  Steinfield,  C.:  A  face(book)  in  the  crowd:  social  Searching  vs.  
social  browsing.  In:  ACM  Conference  on  Computer  Supported  Cooperative  Work  
(CSCW 2006), Banff, Canada, pp. 167–170 (2006) 

21.  McFarlane, D.: Coordinating the Interruption of People in Human-Computer Interaction. 
In: Human-Computer Interaction (INTERACT), Edinburgh, Scotland, pp. 295–303 (1999) 
22.  Mejía, D., Favela, J., Morán, A.L.: Understanding and Supporting Lightweight Communication 
in Hospital Work. IEEE Trans. on Information Technology in Biomedicine 14(1), 
140–146 (2010) 

23.  Monares, A., Ochoa, S., Pino, J., Herskovic, V., Rodriguez-Covili, J., Neyem, A.: Mobile 
Computing in Urban Emergency Situations: Improving the Support to Firefighters in the 
Field. Expert Systems with Applications (to appear, 2010) 

24.  Morán, E., Tentori, M., González, V., Martinez-Garcia, A., Favela, J.: Mobility in Hospital 
Work:  Towards  a  Pervasive  Computing  Hospital  Environment.  International  Journal  of 
Electronic Healthcare 3(1), 72–89 (2005) 

25.  Ploderer,  B.,  Howard,  S.,  Thomas, P.,  Reitberger,  W.:  “Hey  world,  take  a  look  at  me!”: 
Appreciating the Human Body on Social Network Sites. In: Oinas-Kukkonen, H., Hasle, 
P.,  Harjumaa,  M.,  Segerståhl,  K.,  Øhrstrøm,  P.  (eds.)  PERSUASIVE  2008.  LNCS, 
vol. 5033, pp. 245–248. Springer, Heidelberg (2008) 

26.  Rodriguez-Covili, J., Ochoa, S., Pino, J.: Enhancing Mobile Collaboration with HLMP. In: 
14th Computer Supported Collaborative Work in Design (CSCWD), Shanghai, China, pp. 
467–472 (2010) 

27.  Rodriguez-Covili,  J.,  Ochoa,  S.,  Pino,  J.,  Messeguer,  R.,  Medina,  E.,  Royo,  D.:  HLMP 
API:  A  Software  Library  to  Support  the  Development  of  Mobile  Collaborative  Applications.
 In: 14th Computer Supported Collaborative Work in Design (CSCWD), Shanghai, 
China, pp. 479–484 (2010) 

28.  Rodriguez-Covili, J., Ochoa, S.F., Pino, J.A., Herskovic, V., Favela, J., Mejía, D., Morán, 
A.L.: Towards a Reference Architecture for the Design of Mobile Shared Workspaces. Future 
Generation Computer Systems (to appear, 2010) 

29.  Sanchez, D., Tentori, M., Favela, J.: Activity Recognition for the Smart Hospital. IEEE Intelligent 
Systems 23(2), 50–57 (2008) 

30.  Segura, D., Favela, J., Tentori, M.: Sentient Displays in Support of Hospital Work. In: 3rd 
Symposium  on  Ubiquitous  Computing  and  Ambient  Intelligence  (UCAmI),  Salamanca, 
Spain, pp. 103–111 (2008) 

31.  Tollmar, K., Sandor, O., Schömer, A.: Supporting Social Awareness @ Work: Design and 
In:  ACM  Conference  on  Computer  Supported  Cooperative  Work  

Experience. 
(CSCW 1996), Boston, USA, pp. 298–307 (1996) 

 

