 

The Internet of Things  

to Support Urban Incident Responses 

Rodrigo Santos1, Javier Orozco1, Sergio F. Ochoa2, and Roc Meseguer3 

1 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computers, IIIE, UNS-CONICET, Argentina 

2 Computer Science Department, Universidad de Chile, Chile 

3 Computer Science Department, Universidad Politécnica de Cataluña, Spain 

Abstract. Although the technological components required to implement Internet 
of Things (IoT) inspired solutions are already available, in most application 
scenarios it is not clear how to structure and combine them to reach a certain 
global behavior of a system. This paper proposes an architecture that helps design 
IoT-based systems that support the first responses during medium-size or 
large  urban  incidents.  The  main  components  of  this  architecture are  characterized 
and the interactions between them are also specified. The usefulness of the 
proposed architecture is illustrated through its hypothetical use in a real urban 
emergency.  The  use  of  this  proposal  could  be  extended  to  other  application  
areas such as security operatives and monitoring of patients at home.  

Keywords:  Internet  of  things,  human-based  wireless  sensor  networks,  emergency 
response, urban emergencies, ambient intelligence, information sharing. 

1 

Introduction 

Medium  and  large  emergencies  affecting  urban  areas  (e.g.  train  derailments,  fires 
affecting buildings, and accidental or intentional explosions) usually represent a challenging 
 situation  for first responders, due the lack of event early detection systems, 
mechanisms to perform a quick diagnose of the situation, and supporting information 
to make decisions in a distributed way. The complexity of the urban scenarios usually 
increases this challenge. 

Immediately after an incident occurs, a 911 service receives the emergency calls. 
The  operators  receiving  these  calls  has  to  determine  the  veracity  of  the  emergency, 
and then perform a first diagnose of the incident (type, size and complexity), using the 
information  provided  by  the  people  [12].  Based  on  such  a  diagnosis,  the  operators 
dispatch  resources  (mainly  firefighters,  police  officers,  and  paramedics)  to  perform 
the first response process. The diagnosis and dispatching processes can take several 
minutes. 

The  response  process  involves  resources  transportation  (e.g.  fire  trucks,  ambulances,
 police vehicles, and first responders) that have to arrive quickly to the emergency 
 place.  The  reaction  time  and  the  efficiency  in  the  first  response  process  are 
crucial to reduce the number of victims in an emergency [12], [14]. In [3] it is proved 
that reducing the first response time by 1 minute, correlates to a six percent difference 

G. Urzaiz et al. (Eds.): UCAmI 2013, LNCS 8276, pp. 286–293, 2013. 
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2013 

 

The Internet of Things to Support Urban Incident Responses 

287 

in the number of lives saved in car crashes. These numbers are probably representative 
of other urban incidents. 

The coordination of the emergency response activities represent a major challenge 
for  first  responders  due  to  several  reasons:  (1)  civilians  usually  go  to  the  incident 
place to see what is happening, obstructing thus the resources transportation and response 
 process,  (2)  services  in  the  area  tends  to  collapse  (e.g.  communication  and 
transportation) or they are temporarily suspended for safety reasons (e.g. energy, gas 
and  water),  (3)  there  is  little  or  no  supporting  information  to  make  decisions  and 
coordinate  the  efforts  among  the  participants,  and  (4)  the  available  radio  channels 
used by first responders (e.g. firefighters, police officers, paramedic, and emergency 
managers) are not enough to coordinate the response activities. Therefore, the regular 
pattern in these situations is the improvisation of the first response process [10], [11]. 
This paper shows how regular sensing systems deployed in the affected areas can 
be used to help improve the  efficiency and effectiveness of  first response processes 
after medium-size or large urban incidents. The proposal is based on the Internet of 
Things  (IoT)  paradigm  [4]  and  uses  a  Human-centric  Wireless  Sensor  Network 
(HWSN)  [13]  to provide  some  intelligence  to  the  response  process.  Particularly,  an 
architecture that integrates information providers and consumers is described, indicating 
how to support the shared information flow among the participants. The use of the 
proposed architecture is illustrated analyzing a real first response process, which addressed 
a train crash happened at the Once train station, in Buenos Aires city (Argen-
tina) in February 22nd, 2012. The article analyzes how the proposed architecture could 
have helped improve the reaction time and response activities after such an incident. 

Next section presents and discusses the related work. Section 3 describes the proposed 
 architecture.  Section  4  exemplifies,  using  a  real  urban  emergency  situation, 
how the architecture could have contributed to reduce the incident impact. Section 5 
presents the conclusions and the future work. 

2 

Related Work 

The use of mobile devices, wireless sensor networks, and even the use of IoT to support 
 first  responses  in  urban  incidents,  has  been  addressed  by  several  researchers. 
Concerning the incident detection, White et al. [16] proposed an automatic mechanism 
for traffic accident detection and notification using smart-phones. It delivers early 
alerts to particular emergency centers and thus accelerates the response process. Similarly,
 Liu et al. [8] use cyberphysical elements (called intelligent guards) deployed in 
the  physical  infrastructure  to  deliver  early  alarms  when  an  extreme  event  affects  a 
certain urban area. 

Concerning  the  support  for  the  first  response  process,  Martin-Campillo  et  al.  [9] 
propose a RFID-based solution to tag injured people, indicating their health condition 
before to deliver them to a hospital. Several researchers propose the use of mobile ad 
hoc networks, usually implemented using Wi-Fi, to provide communications support 
in disaster areas [1], [11], [15]. Ochoa and Santos [13] go a step forward and introduce 
 the  concept  of  Human-centric  Wireless  Sensor  Networks  (HWSN).  They  also 
show how HWSN-based solutions can be used to increase the information availability 
in the affected area.  

 

288 

R. Santos et al. 

Zhang et al. [18] describes an IoT-inspired platform, which was designed to support 
 emergency  management  systems.  Although  such  a  proposal  is  quite  general,  it 
allows  seeing  how  the  several  components  participating  in  the  process  can  interact 
among them to capture or disseminate shared information. 

Yang et al. [17] propose a modified “task-technology fit” approach to help understand 
 how  the  IoT  technology  can  enhance  the  urban  first  response  activities.  This 
approach does not indicate how to design IoT solutions to support these operations, 
but it allows us to realize the role of IoT technology in urban emergencies. 

Although the previous proposals are interesting and contribute to improve the effectiveness 
 of  the  first  response  process,  none  of  them  presents  an  architecture  that 
indicates the type of components participating in the solution, the role played by each 
of them, and the  way in  which the shared information is captured and disseminated 
using these components. This article proposes an architecture inspired in the IoT paradigms,
  which  uses  a  HWSN  to  determine  components  roles,  and  also  the  support 
required  for  information  dissemination  and  fusion.  Next  section  describes  the  
proposed architecture, its main components and interactions among them. 

3 

The IoT-Inspired Architecture 

Internet  of  Things  infrastructures  allow  data  and  services  integration  among  smart 
objects  (e.g.  mobile  robots),  sensing  devices  and  human  beings,  using  different  but 
interoperable  communication  protocols  [6].  Following  this  definition,  Fig.  1  shows 
the architecture proposed for systems that support first responders after medium-size 
or  large  urban  incidents.  The  architecture  involves  four  layers  that  implement  the 
separation of concerns: sensing, communication, information persistence and application 
(i.e. usage).  

Fig. 1. Hierarchy of architectural components 

 

The sensing layer is responsible to capture information from the field, which will 
be then used to support the decision making and coordination activities. Two types of 
components  contribute  to  perform  this  activity:  regular  sensors  (RS)  and  humanbased 
 sensors  (HBS).  The  first  ones  (e.g.  weather  and  motion  sensors,  or  

 

 

The Internet of Things to Support Urban Incident Responses 

289 

video-camera)  capture  information  from  the  environment  and  transmit  it  through  a 
component of the communication layer. The HBS perform the same activity, however 
these sensors are people that also uses his senses to capture additional the information 
from the environment. Using such information, and eventually the data given by regular 
sensors, the HBS produce knowledge that represents the current value of a certain 
context variable (e.g. the emergency type or size). Although the HBS are not accurate, 
they  represent  our  best  choice  when  the  observed  variable  is  not  measurable  by  a 
regular sensor. 

The HBS uses a mobile device that allows him to share that knowledge with others 
and also to sense context variables (see the sensing layer in Fig. 1), e.g. the presence 
of other responders in the area by using an opportunistic network (oppnet). It is assumed 
that every component participating in this solution has a network interface that 
allows it to communicate with others through a digital network interface. 

The  communication  layer is responsible to provide interaction capability to components 
 participating  in  the  first  response  process.  Because  there  is  not  a  universal 
network interface, this layer is implemented as a set of heterogeneous solutions, hopefully 
 linked  through  communication  bridges  (Fig.  2a).  Typically  two  types  of  communication 
 solutions  are  used  in  these  scenarios:  infrastructure-based  and  ad  hoc 
networks. The first one uses the regular communication infrastructure (i.e. satellites, 
cellular antennas and wired networks) and also mobile antennas to communicate the 
resources in the affected area, with remote components (e.g. emergency offices, data 
centers, remote experts, government agencies). We call communication units (CU) to 
these components that link resources inside the affected area with those that are outside 
 the  emergency  place  (see  Fig.  1).  Thus,  these  CUs  allow  the  remote  gathering 
and analysis of information (e.g. through Internet) that comes from sensors deployed 
in the emergency area (Fig. 2b). 

 

(a) 

 

(b) 

Fig. 2. Communication Infrastructure 

Concerning  the  support  based  on  ad  hoc  networks,  its  role  is  to  provide  and  enhance 
the communication links in the field, increasing thus the information availability 
in that area and reducing the improvisation during the response process [10], [11], 
[13]. The use of opportunistic networks (oppnet) is highly recommended because they 
can work although the regular communication infrastructure is not available. An opp290 


R. Santos et al. 

net  is  a  peer-to-peer  application-oriented  mesh,  able  to  support  ad  hoc  interactions 
among  stationary  and  mobile  units  that  are  physically  close;  e.g.  sensors,  humanbased 
sensors and communication units deployed in the affected area. The oppnets are 
built in the application layer and they use a “store and forward” paradigm for transmitting 
messages [7]. The nodes participating in these networks can act as gateways 
bridging oppnets and regular Internet channels, allowing thus services integration and 
information exchange according to the IoT paradigm.  

Provided that oppnets have quite short communication threshold, a special type of 
mobile node helps connect disjoint networks, allowing thus asynchronous communication 
among resources in the field. These mobile nodes, known as “mules” (Mu), are 
typically  implemented  through  computing  devices  installed  on  police  vehicles,  fire 
trucks and ambulances (see the communication layer in Fig. 1).  

The information persistence layer is responsible to store and share the supporting 
information,  allowing  participants  to  coordinate  their  activities  and  make  better  and 
on-time  decisions.  Several  types  of  components  can  play  this  role,  for  instance  the 
HBS,  Mu  and  Witness  Units  (WU).  The  WU  are  buffers  used  on-demand  by  other 
nodes to store shared information. These WU also act as information gateway, particularly 
if they are accessible through Internet.  

Finally the application layer is responsible to provide a direct and useful service to 
the end-users, e.g. first responders, incident commanders, emergency managers, government 
agents, hospital personnel and civilians (regular drivers). These applications 
make use of the services provided by the rest of the proposed architecture. 

The role, behavior and services of every component type described in the architecture 
 are  clearly  delimited.  Therefore  they  can  be  formalized  in  a  computable  language,
 and then used with several purposes; for instance to evaluate vulnerability of a 
certain  urban  area,  design  response  plans  during  a  preparedness  or  response  phase, 
and  also  to  learn  after  an  incident.  Several  emergency  response  agencies  can  take 
advantage of it to design not only their own response processes, but also the coordination 
of activities with other agencies, which is a recurrent limitation reported by the 
researchers after every medium-size and large incident. 

The  technology  required  to  implement  emergency  response  solutions  adhering  to 
the proposed architecture is available, and part of it is already deployed in many public 
spaces; i.e. Wi-Fi and GSM antennas, mobile devices with several communication 
capabilities, surveillance cameras, public speakers and displays, remotely controlled 
semaphores, traffic sensors, weather sensors, and ad hoc communication and positioning 
services. Only considering these regular components it is possible to design solutions 
to make more effective the response process to an urban incident.  

4 

Application Example 

In order to exemplify the usefulness of this proposal, we will analyze some aspects of 
the response process conducted by first response task forces on February 22nd, 2012, 
after a train crash at a central station in Buenos  Aires,  Argentina.  After 8:30 AM a 
train  crashed  with  the  end  of  line  at  the  Once  station.  The  accident  leave  fifty  two 
dead people and over seven hundred injured. 

 

 

The Internet of Things to Support Urban Incident Responses 

291 

The Once station is the third one in importance in Buenos Aires. It is the head line 
for a very large rail network that goes to the west of the city. Only 3 km away from 
the city center, this station is a hub for buses, subway and other train lines. Every day 
one  million  people  go  through  this  hub  for  transportation  connections  (train-bus-
subway) or as their final station.   

When the accident took place, the diagnose process involved various minutes due 
the complexity of the physical scenario, and it began when the first firefighters company 
arrived to the place. Although the accident was recorded by various surveillance 
cameras  (i.e.  a  regular  sensor),  neither  automatic  alarms  were  delivered  nor  video 
records were shared with the emergency centers that could have helped to reduce the 
reaction time. Analyzing the accident video records it is possible to estimate the size 
and type of the emergency in approximately one minute. Therefore, sharing this video 
with the proper emergency center could have allowed triggering a quick response and 
saving more lives. 

Once known the first diagnose and according to the protocol, the emergency center 
(i.e. the end-user) performed a formal dispatch of emergency resources, particularly 
firemen and ambulances. At that time the traffic and communication in the area were 
collapsed, therefore the dispatched resources (many of them can be considered HBS) 
had several problems to arrive to the emergency place, find the place assigned to park 
the emergency vehicles (depending on the role played by each resource type), find the 
incident commander (i.e., a HBS) and the command post, and get basic information 
about the emergency.  

In  the  response  process  participated  two  helicopters,  110  ambulances,  55  police 
vehicles (over a hundred policemen) and 6 firefighting companies (over three hundred 
firemen). Fifteen hospitals received the injured people (a total of 676 people according 
to the official report [5]). The ambulances started transporting these people to the 
three  closest  hospitals.  Once  these  hospitals  were  overcrowded,  other  options  were 
taken.  However, being this  situation  visible for the ambulances  was a complex task 
that required a considerable time. Therefore, many ambulances tried to leave injured 
people in more than one hospital until find one able to receive them. The first paramedic 
 (i.e.  HBS)  arriving  to a  collapsed  hospital  could  record  the  hospital  status  in 
one or most witness units, and thus other ambulances accessing such an information 
can know where exactly to transport the people. 

After the first 12 hours, no lists of dead and injured people were available. Therefore,
 relatives and friends of potential victims were asking in different hospitals and at 
the city morgue for hours, interfering with an already complex response process. The 
hospital managers (i.e. HBS) could have made public the list of injured people located 
there, e.g. through a Web portal or in a witness unit, allowing thus that civilians (also 
HBS) perform their searches quickly and without jeopardizing the response activities.  
The search and rescue process took all day, and at the end there was still a missing 
person, who was found 48 hours later. He was a young man who got into the train 20 
minutes  before  the  crash  and  that  was  travelling  in  a  compartment  were  passengers 
are not allowed to be. The rescuers went over the spot without noticing his presence.  
This situation could be overcame due the public transportation system uses a contactless 
smart card, called SUBE (that stands for Electronic Ticket Unified System, in 
Spanish),  which identifies each user. Making a small extension to the current infrastructure 
it is possible to know the number of people in the train, and also the identity 

 

292 

R. Santos et al. 

and location of each passenger. If this information is shared through a  witness unit, 
then  it  is  possible  to  accelerate  the  response  process,  triggering  parallel  procedures 
that  help  reduce  the  damage.  It  also  would  have  allowed  an  early  detection  of  the 
missing person. An extra support for the people location could also be obtained using 
localization mechanisms based on cellular phones (with the WAP-OTA protocol).  

Concerning communication support in the affected area, there is not clear information 
in the emergency reports, except that the telephone networks (wired and wireless) 
collapsed immediately after the incident and that were down for various hours. There 
is not report of the use of mobile antennas and only VHF radio systems seems to be 
used to support communication in the field. This situation is aligned with many others 
large incidents affecting urban areas [9], [11], [15]. 

The  use  of  sensor  networks,  for  example  focused  on  traffic  control,  could  have 
helped  to  change  the  frequency  of  the  traffic  lights  when  an  emergency  vehicle  is 
approaching, or route the regular vehicles toward safe areas, where they do not interfere 
with the response process. Moreover, oppnet-based applications could be used to 
coordinate the response activities in the field and share valuable information to make 
local decisions. Although the technology to implement IoT-based solutions that support 
 urban  emergency  responses  is  already  available,  there  are  no  clear  guidelines 
about  the  role  played  by  each  component  type,  how  to  integrate  them,  and  how  to 
design the behavior of an integral solution. In that sense, we hope that the proposed 
architecture and components characterizations contribute to reach such a goal. 

5 

Conclusions and Future Work 

Urban incidents happen frequently in large cities and affect many people. Providing a 
fast  an  effective  response  process  is  critical  to  save  lives  and  reduce  the  impact  of 
these  incidents  on  the  civil  property.  This  paper  presents  an  architecture  that  helps 
design and implement IoT-based solutions that support first responses in urban areas. 
The proposal is particularly focused on large response processes, where many information 
producers and consumers need to be linked, and the information flow should 
be maximized. The architecture considers heterogeneous participants and communication 
networks. The example presented in Section 4 allows us to show that IoT-based 
solutions could play a key role in the improvement of responses to urban incidents. 

Provided the role, behavior and services of the components considered in the architecture 
are clearly delimited, they can be modeled and formalized using a computable 
language. Thus, several IoT-based solutions adhering to the proposed architecture can 
be modeled, simulated and evaluated from a theoretical point of view, and then implemented 
when the designers are sure about the solution capabilities and limitations.  
The  use  of  a  formal  model  for  integrating  the  proposed  components  would  also 
help evaluate vulnerability of urban areas and design coordination protocols between 
emergency response agencies. The next steps in this initiative are particularly focused 
on  formalizing  the  architecture  components  and  their  interactions  using  a  modeling 
computable language. 

 

Acknowledgments.  This  work  has  been  supported  by  Fondecyt  (Chile),  Grant  No. 
1120207 and by Spanish DELFIN grant TIN2010-20140-C03-01.  

 

 

The Internet of Things to Support Urban Incident Responses 

293 

References 

1.  Aldunate, R., Ochoa, S.F., Pena-Mora, F., Nussbaum, M.: Robust Mobile Ad-hoc Space 
for Collaboration to Support Disaster Relief Efforts Involving Critical Physical Infrastructure.
 ASCE Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering 20(1), 13–27 (2006) 

2.  Braunstein, B., Trimble, T., Mishra, R., Manoj, B., Lenert, L., Rao, R.: Challenges in Using 
Distributed Wireless Mesh Networks in Emergency Response. In: Proc. of ISCRAM 
2006, NJ, USA, May 13-17 (2006) 

3.  Evanco, W.: The impact of rapid incident detection on freeway accident fatalities. Technical 
Report, Center for Information Systems, McLean,Virginia, USA (1996) 

4.  Feki, M.A., Kawsar, F., Boussard, M., Trappeniers, L.: The Internet of Things: The Next 

Technological Revolution. IEEE Computer 46(2), 24–25 (2013) 

5.  Government  of  the  Buenos  Aires  city.  Official  Report  of  the  Train  Accident  in  Sarmiento 

Line,  
http://buenosaires.gob.ar/2012-02-22-accidente-trensarmiento 
(last visit: September 15, 2013) (in Spanish) 

6.  IoT European Research Cluster. Internet of Things Strategic Research Roadmap. Cluster 

SRA (2011) 

7.  Lilien, L., Kamal, Z., Bhuse, V., Gupta, A.: Opportunistic networks: the concept and research 
challenges in privacy and security. In: Proc. of the Int. Workshop on Research Challenges in 
Security and Privacy for Mobile and Wireless Networks, Miami, USA (2006) 

8.  Liu,  J.W.S.,  Chi-Sheng,  S.,  Chu,  E.T.-H.:  Cyberphysical  Elements  of  Disaster-Prepared 

Smart Environments. IEEE Computer 46(2), 69–75 (2013) 

9.  Martin-Campillo, A., Martí, R., Yoneki, E., Crowcroft, J.: Electronic triage tag and opportunistic 
networks in disasters. In: Proc. of the Special Workshop on Internet and Disasters, 
pp. 6:1–6:10. ACM Press, New York (2011) 

10.  Mendonça, D.: Decision Support for Improvisation in Response to Extreme Events: Learning 
from the Response to the 2001 World Trade Center Attack. In: Decision Support Systems,
 vol. 43(3), pp. 952–967 (2007) 

11.  Monares,  A.,  Ochoa,  S.F.,  Pino,  J.A.,  Herskovic,  V.,  Rodriguez-Covili,  J.,  Neyem,  A.: 
Mobile Computing in Urban Emergency Situations: Improving the Support to Firefighters 
in the Field. Expert Systems with Applications 38(2), 1255–1267 (2011) 

12.  Monares,  A.,  Ochoa,  S.F.,  Pino,  J.A.,  Herskovic,  V.:  Improving  the  Initial  Response 
Process in Urban Emergencies. In: Proc. of the IEEE CSCWD 2012, Wuhan, China, May 
23-25 (2012) 

13.  Ochoa, S.F., Santos, R.: Human-centric Wireless Sensor Networks to Improve Information 
Availability During Urban Search and Rescue Activities. Inf. Fusion (in Press) (to appear) 
14.  Ozbay, K., Xiao, W., Jaiswal, G., Bartin, B., Kachroo, P., Baykal-Gursoy, M.: Evaluation 
of  incident  management  strategies  and  technologies  using  an  integrated  traffic/incident 
management simulation. World Rev. of Int. Transp. Research 2(2/3), 155–186 (2009) 

15.  Panitzek, K., Schweizer, I., Bönning, T., Seipel, G., Mühlhäuser, M.: First responder communication 
in urban environments. Int. J. Mob. Netw. Des. Innov. 4(2), 109–118 (2012) 

16.  White, J., Thompson, C., Turner, H., Dougherty, B., Schmidt, D.C.: Wreckwatch:  Automatic 
traffic accident detection and notification with smartphones. Mobile Network Applications 
16(3), 285–303 (2011) 

17.  Yang, L., Yang, S., Plotnick, L.: How the internet of things technology enhances emergency 
response operations. Technol. Forecasting and Social Change (August 2012) 

18.  Zhang, J., Qi, A.:  The  application of Internet of things (IoT) in emergency  management 
system in China. In: Proc. of the IEEE Conf. on Technol. for Homeland Security, November 
8-10, pp. 139–142 (2010) 

 

