MOCET: A MObile Collaborative Examination Tool 

Sergio F. Ochoa1, Andrés Neyem1, Gabriel Bravo1, and Emilio Ormeño2 

1 Computer Science Department, Universidad de Chile 

Blanco Encalada 2120, Santiago, Chile 

{sochoa,aneyem,gabravo}@dcc.uchile.cl 
2 Institute of Informatics, Universidad Nacional de San Juan 
Av. I de la Roza and Meglioli, Rivadavia, San Juan, Argentina 

eormeno@iifo.unsj.edu.ar 

Abstract. This paper presents a mobile collaborative application to support the 
Collaborative  Examination  Technique  (CET).  This  software  tool,  named 
MOCET, keeps the metaphor of the student’s paper notebook used to support 
CET  processes.  In  addition,  it  provides  solutions  to  overcome  the  two  main 
limitations identified on CET: (a) the inefficiency to support the building and 
sharing  knowledge  processes  carried  out  by  students during  the pre  and posttest 
activities, and (b) the high cost in time spent by instructors to carry out the 
examination  process.  Although  MOCET  is  able  to  run  on  several  computing 
devices, it has been specially designed to be used on Tablet PCs and PDAs and 
interact with the users using a pen device. This tool replaces the student’s paper 
notebook during exams and supports students and instructors in every phase of 
the  examination  process.  MOCET  has  been  tested  in  two  computer  science 
courses and interesting results were obtained.  

Keywords: Student Examination Process, Mobile Collaborative Tool, On-Line 
Tests. 

1   Introduction 

According to Hay, the objective behind the realization of an examination can be (a) to 
measure the real level of the  students’  knowledge, and (b) to  measure the students’ 
capability  to  relate  and  integrate  the  acquired  knowledge  [5].  Meanwhile,  Ebel  and 
Frisbie argue the objective of examinations is to measure the students’ achievements, 
to  motivate  and  direct  their  process  of  learning  [3].  These  are  the  most  accepted 
interpretations  of  the  examinations  main  goal.  However,  Ochoa  et  al.  stated 
examinations  can  also  be  used  for  learning,  especially  if  collaborative  learning 
activities  can  be  integrated  into  them.  In  order  to  demonstrate  such  hypothesis  an 
examination  technique  was  designed  and  tested:  CET  (Collaborative  Examination 
Technique)  [9].  CET  involves  three  stages  composing  a  collaborative  examination 
process:  pre-test,  test  and  post-test  (see  Figure  1).  Each  phase  is  carried  out  in  a 
consecutive  lecture  time  space,  for  example,  a  lecture.  The  pre-test  main  goal  is  to 
help  students  to  understand  and  assimilate,  in  an  early  stage,  the  knowledge  that  is 
going  to  be  considered  in  the  test  phase.  During  a  pre-test,  students  follow  a  

 

M.J. Smith, G. Salvendy (Eds.): Human Interface, Part II, HCII 2007, LNCS 4558, pp. 440–449, 2007. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007 

 

MOCET: A MObile Collaborative Examination Tool 

441 

Fig. 1. CET Phases 

 

collaborative  process  similar  to  Jigsaw  [1]  in  order  to  find  consensual  responses  to 
questions/test items provided by the instructor.  

In CET the test phase involves the individual resolution of an exam, similar to a 
traditional  examination  processes  conducted  by  using  paper  and  pencil.  Then,  the 
post-test intends to reach two  main  goals: (1) students  find the right answers to the 
test questions/items through a conducted discussion, and (2) students can identify the 
right points and the mistakes in their answers.  

This technique has been recurrently applied in computer science and engineering 
courses  at  University  of  Chile.  The  obtained  results  have  shown  students  increase 
their knowledge during these collaborative examination activities and they feel these 
techniques are fair evaluating the acquired knowledge [9]. However, CET has shown 
two  main  limitations  that  jeopardize  its  applicability:  (a)  the  inefficiency  to  support 
the  building  and  sharing  knowledge  processes  carry  out  by  students  during  pre  and 
post-test,  and  (b)  the  high  cost  in  time  spent  by  instructors  to  carry  out  the 
examination  process.  These  limitations  are  a  consequence  of  the  manual  methods 
used  by  instructors  to  conduct  each  CET  phase  and  the  poor  mechanisms  used  to 
record  and  share  the  knowledge  among  the  people  involved  in  the  examination 
process. Next, these two limitations are briefly explained. 
−  Inefficiency  to  support  the  building  and  sharing  knowledge  processes.  The 
knowledge building and sharing processes carry out by students doing pre-test and 
post-test  activities  are  currently  supported  by  hard  copy  and  verbal  information. 
This type of support limits the students’ capability to represent, keep and distribute 
the knowledge among their partners. Typically, the people memory and motivation 
play  an  active  role  when  they  have  to  share  the  knowledge  with  the  partners.  In 
addition,  the  knowledge  building  and  evolution  process  require  co-located 
teammates  provided  the  information  synchronization  is  slow  and  difficult  to  do 
when  the  knowledge  is  recorded  in  a  paper  and  in  the  students’  mind.  However, 
students  feel  comfortable  with  the  free  writing  style  allowed  by  the  paper  and 
pencil, and they think these are the best tools they have to support the building and 
sharing knowledge processes. 

−  High cost in time for instructors. In addition, the effort required by instructors to 
plan, execute and analyze each examination phase is high. If instructors want to get 
detailed information about the examination process execution in order to adjust it 
or improve it, they have to record the information in video and then analyze it in a 
manual manner. On the other hand, the rating process of a student’s exam requires 
considering  his/her  contributions  during  the  test  and  post-test  phases.  Such 
information is recorded in paper and it should be manually processed in order to 
get the final student’s score. For that reason, the process becomes time-consuming 

442 

S.F. Ochoa et al. 

and prone to instructor’s mistakes. Similar to students, instructors feel comfortable 
using the free writing style allowed by the paper and pencil when they are rating an 
exam.  

Next  section  describes  the  phases  of  CET  and  the  obtained  results.  Section  3 
presents  the  Mobile  Collaborative  Examination  Tool  (MOCET)  and  it  describes  its 
functionality.  Section  4  shows  the  obtained  results  and  section  5  presents  the 
conclusion and the further work. 

2   Collaborative Examination Technique 

Collaborative  Examination  Technique  (CET)  introduces  collaborative  learning 
activities  in  the  pre  and  post-test  phases  in  order  to  promote  discussion  and 
negotiation  among  students  about  the  response  to  questions  pre-established  by  the 
instructor. Each phase is carried out during consecutive lectures (Figure 1) and all of 
them contribute to the exam final score for a student.  

2.1   Pre-test Phase 

The pre-test first activity is the creation of a list of questions with complexity similar 
to those that will be included into the exam. These questions should be related to the 
knowledge  considered  for  the  test  (exam)  and  they  have  to  be  open  to  promote  the 
discussion and negotiation among students. 

Once  the  instructor  created  the  pre-test  questions,  she  defines  the  work  groups, 
trying  to  obtain  heterogeneous  groups,  in  regard  to  levels  of  knowledge.  For  this 
purpose, she can base her decisions on previous evaluations or the students’ history. If 
that  information  is  not  available,  groups  should  be  formed  at  random.  Each  group 
should have  four or five  students [6]. The set of questions handed by the instructor 
should be the same length as the number of group members. All the groups must be 
the  same  size.  Once  the  groups  are  formed,  the  instructor  numbers  the  groups  and 
hands over the questions. Then, each member of the group is assigned a question, and 
his responsibility is to become an expert on that subject (individual responsibility). 

In the solution discussion in pairs or expert teams, each individual leaves his group 
and looks for another student who was assigned the same question (it is recommended 
that  it  be  done  in  pairs,  but  it  can  be  done  in  groups  of  three,  and  maximum  four). 
These students have to interact and negotiate their viewpoints, with the objective of 
solving  the  assigned  problem.  They  can  aid  themselves  with  any  didactic  material 
(books, notes, etc.) while doing this activity. The instructor decides the length of this 
activity and sees that pre-established times are globally fulfilled. This revision in pairs 
can be repeated more than once, until all solutions have reached all groups.  

During the revisions in pairs, the students with the same assigned questions group 
again in pairs, but different pairs than in the previous activity. Then, the solution that 
was found in the previous phase is revised, and the presentation of this solution to the 
group  is  posed.  Finally,  during  the  information  presentation,  the  students  return  to 
their  original  groups,  where  each  member  informs  his  fellow  group  members  about 
the solution to the problem that had been assigned to him. 

 

MOCET: A MObile Collaborative Examination Tool 

443 

The  positive  interdependence  present  in  this  phase  is  of  the  “reward”  type  since 
one of the analyzed questions  will appear in the  test. The instructor  must  guarantee 
that this will happen. Consequently, if each member of the group does his part of the 
work  well,  everybody  wins,  because  they  have  solved  one  of  the  test  questions 
beforehand.  

2.2   Test Phase 

In that phase, each student answers his test individually. The idea is that part of 
the  knowledge  built  or  reviewed  in  the  pre-test  should  be  related  with  the 
questions  or  problems  included  in  the  exam  during  the  test  phase.  Typically  six 
questions  (or  problems)  are  included  in  the  exams,  and  the  students  have  90 
minutes to respond it. 

2.3   Post-test Phase 

During the class after the test, the students receive a photocopy of their exams. Then, 
groups of four or five students are formed to solve the test questions using discussion 
and negotiation. Finally, each student grades his/her own exam.  

Students use the solution outline constructed by the group for that purpose. If the 
grade a student assigns to an exam item differs in no more than 0.3 points (i.e., plus or 
minus  5%  of  the  grade  range)  from  the  grade  assigned  by  the  corrector 
(instructor/assistant), the final grade for that question will be equal to the corrector’s 
grade,  plus  a  0.5  point  bonus.  If  a  student  gets  a  bonus,  it  is  because  he/she 
understood what is right and wrong in his/her exam responses. This bonus shall not be 
assigned to those grades that required a justification but do not have one. Nor will it 
be  assigned  to  those  answers  that  agree  with  the  grade,  but  have  a  wrong  or 
insufficient justification. 

During the post-test a member of the group must keep track of the time, because at 
the  end  of  the  activity  all  items  must  have  been  corrected.  The  positive 
interdependence stems from the fact that good solutions to the questions, constructed 
with the aid of everybody, help everyone be more objective in his own evaluation. 

2.4   CET Results 

This technique  was  tested  with  various Computer Science courses  in  three different 
universities (Table 1): Universidad de Chile (UCH), Pontificia Universidad Católica 
de Chile (PUC) and Universidad Nacional de San Juan, Argentina (UNSJ) [9]. These 
courses correspond to college and graduate levels. 

For some of these courses, the proposed technique was evaluated more than once 
(several  semesters).  During  the  experimentation  process  four  exams  were  taken  in 
each  course:  two  traditional  exams  and  two  exams  taken  using  the  proposed 
technique. All were done in the same order and following the same patterns. 

At  the  end  of  each  course,  an  opinion  poll  was  conducted,  to  get  the  students’ 
opinions.  The  obtained  results  shown  that  CET  is  able  to  reduce  the  impact  of  the 
following typical problems: 

444 

S.F. Ochoa et al. 

1. Ambiguous  Writings:  It  is  possible  to  find  more  than  one  meaning  for  the  same 
exam  question.  This  can  lead  to  the  appearance  of  differences  between  the 
student’s and the examiner’s interpretation.  

2. Anxiety:  The  students  show  anxiety  before  and  after  the  exams.  The  pre-test 
anxiety  is  due  to  the  student’s  uncertainty  about  the  knowledge  that  will  be 
evaluated.  On  the  other  hand,  the  post-test  anxiety  is  due  to  the  fact  that 
examination  results  take  too  much  time  to  be  corrected,  so  many  students  are 
anxious to know their results. This anxiety can interfere with the student’s learning 
process [2]. 

3. Lack  of  uniformity  in  correction  criteria:  Usually,  courses  have  more  than  one 
Teaching Assistant (TA) in charge of examining tests. Even though they receive a 
correction  outline,  the  same  correction  criteria  are  not  typically  used.  In  many 
cases, an important part of the final grade depends on the corrector’s criterion. 

4. Sensation  of  injustice:  Many  students  do  not  dare  to  ask  the  instructor  or  the 
correctors  about  dubious  correction  of  their  exams.  It  is  also  possible  that  the 
corrector does not give a convincing answer to a student’s protest.  More so, there 
might be more than one correct answer for one exam item, which many times are 
not  considered  by  the  corrector.  This  leads  to  the  student  feeling  a  sensation  of 
injustice in relation to the instructor and the correctors, and his work. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  limitations  explained  in  section  1  were  identified:  (a)  the 
inefficiency  to  support  the  building  and  sharing  knowledge  processes  carry  out  by 
students during pre and post-test, and (b) the high cost in time spent by instructors to 
carry out the examination process. Because these limitations are a consequence of the 
manual  methods  used  by  instructors  to  conduct  each  CET  phase  and  the  poor 
mechanisms  used  to  record  and  share  the  knowledge  among  the  people  involved  in 
the examination process, the authors developed a software tool that support students, 
assistants  and  instructors  in  such  process.  The  tool  was  named  MOCET  (Mobile 
Collaborative Examination Tool), and it is presented in the next section. 

3   The Mobile Collaborative Examination Tool 

MOCET  was  designed  to  overcome  the  previously  mentioned  CET  limitations,  but 
keeping  the  advantages  of  such  technique.  The  tool  systematizes  the  examination 
process and supports students/instructors during every phase of CET (see Figure 2). It 
provides  four  main  functions  for  instructors:  (1)  examination  activity  preparedness, 
(2)  monitoring  of  pre-test,  test  and  post-test  activities,  (3)  rating  support  for  every 
exam  and  (4)  statistical  information  provision  of  the  examination  process.  The  tool 
also provides three main functions for students corresponding to (1) pre-test, (2) test 
and (3) post-test activities.  

Services  for  both  students  and  instructors  use  the  asynchronous  data  sharing 
support, the persistency and the synchronization mechanisms provided by the PASIR 
platform [7, 8]. Shared objects, such as images, text documents or exams, represent 
basic  pieces  of  information  that  can  be  shared  on-demand  among  members  of  a 
Mobile Ad-hoc NETwork (MANET) session. Such objects are distributed among the 
mobile  devices  used  by  students,  which  compose  an  ad-hoc  distributed  shared 
memory systems. Each object is shared with a set of information layers (XML files) 

 

MOCET: A MObile Collaborative Examination Tool 

445 

linked to it. Each layer represents a voice or textual comment from a student to the 
knowledge represented in the shared object. The instructor is the only role able to act 
as a hub of shared objects. In fact, this capability should be used to support the test 
and post-test phases. 

Monitoring  Support

Activity 

Preparedness

PRE – TEST

TEST

POST – TEST

Analysis of 

Results

Distributed 

Shared 
Memory

Fig. 2. Basic Architecture of MOCET 

 

Provided  that  students  and  instructors  feel  comfortable  using  free  writing  style, 
MOCET was conceived to be used on Tablet PCs and PDAs (see Figure 3 and 4) with 
a pen device. Therefore, particularly relevant was the support included in the tool for 
using  hand-written  information  and  multimedia  resources  (images,  audio/video 
records, text and strokes) during each phase of the examination process (pre-test, test 
and post-test).  

The  system  design  assumed  each  student  will  use  his/her  personal  computing 
device to do the exams. In such cases the tool provides more flexibility and capability 
to  create/evolve/share  the  information  in  several  scenarios  (traveling,  visiting  or 
wandering) [4]. However, students can also use mobile computing devices provided 
by the education institution they belong, just to do the exams. In this case, students 
have  to  export  the  knowledge  built  and  shared  in  each  phase  of  the  process  to  a 
remote  personal  computer  in  order  to  use  such  knowledge  as  study  material  or 
backup.  

In  both  cases,  students  are  able  to  evolve  the  shared  knowledge  (shared  objects 
with  their  XML  information  layers)  in  an  asynchronous  way,  and  synchronize  ondemand 
 such  knowledge  with  one  or  more  partners  just  pushing  a  button  in  the 
MOCET  user  interface.  Provided  this  mechanism  works  in  one-hop  and  multi-hop 
networks,  the  synchronization  process  can  be  done  in  a  large  range  of  physical 
scenarios (e.g. on the street, a bank, a library or a coffee shop). This becomes flexible 
the process of sharing information. 

MOCET provides different functionalities for instructor/assistant and students. For 
instructors and assistants the tool allow them to (1) design the pre-test, test and posttest,
 (2) group students, (3) deliver documents (e.g. exams) among the  students and 
receive  their  responses,  (4)  correct  the  exams  and  determine  if  a  student  gets  the 
bonus or not, and (5) monitor the students’ activities. 

 

446 

S.F. Ochoa et al. 

Fig. 3. MOCET version for Tablet PC 

Fig. 4. MOCET version for PDA 

 
On  the  other  hand,  MOCET  allows  students  to:  (1)  share  knowledge  and  the 
questions included in the pre and post-test, through a student mobile workspace, (2) 
receive, respond and return an exam to the instructor, and (3) receive the  instructor 
correction. Next section presents the experimental results obtained applying MOCET 
in computer science courses. 

 

4   MOCET Obtained Results  

This tool was used once in two different computer science courses, corresponding to 
the  sixth  term  and  ninth  term  respectively,  in  the  computing  engineering  carrier  at 
University of Chile. Each experiment involved 10 students (6 using Tablet PCs and 4 
using PDAs) and 2 instructors (one  using a Tablet PC and the other  using a PDA).  
These computing devices were lent by the Computer Science Department to students 
and  instructors  for  ten  days  in  order  to  execute  this  experiment.  Students  and 
instructors had previous experience using CET without technological support.  

The pre-test and test were based on 6 questions. The obtained results were similar 
in both experiences. The later analysis shown that about 80% of the students learned 
during  the  examination  process,  especially  during  the  post-test.  This  percentage  is 
similar to the CET historical values. After the exercise an opinion poll was conducted, 
to  get  the  students’  and  instructors’  opinions.  Most  of  the  students  (70%)  said  that 
MOCET  is  easier  to  use  than  CET;  particularly  for  the  sharing  information.  People 

 

MOCET: A MObile Collaborative Examination Tool 

447 

using Tablet PCs said that hand-writing functionalities allowed them to operate in a 
similar  way  to  use  a  paper  and  pencil.  However,  people  using  PDAs  found  handwriting 
 functionalities  worse  than  paper  and  pencil,  but  still  usable.  In  addition, 
approximately the 80% of the students considered the examination and rating process 
was  fair,  which  is  a  value  similar  to  CET  historical  records.  If  we  consider  these 
students  know  how  to  use  CET,  but  do  not  MOCET,  we  could  expect  these 
percentages improve in the future. 

Fig. 5. Experimental application of MOCET 

 

On the other hand, the instructors considered the tool reduced, at least to the half, 
the effort required to apply CET. All of them considered the examinations and rating 
processes  were  fair.  Furthermore,  the  knowledge  sharing  services  and  the  handwriting 
support were also the most relevant features for instructors. 

The  number  of  testing  instances  of  MOCET  is  still  low  because  this  is  a  recent 
developed  tool.  Although,  it  is  not  possible  to  get  strong  evidence  of  the  tool 
contributions,  the  preliminary  results  are  encouraging.  We  envision  this  tool  could 
also  be  used  to  support  traditional  examination  process  in  a  broad  range  of 
instructional  scenarios:  from  middle-school  courses  to  postgraduate  programs. 
Currently, authors are designing a massive experimentation process using MOCET in 
computer science and engineering courses at the Engineering School of the University 
of Chile. 

6   Conclusions and Future Work 

Collaborative  Examination  Technique  (CET)  has  shown  good  results  in  engineering 
education  as  examination  and  learning  activities.  However,  this  technique  has  also 
presented two main limitations: (a) sharing information among students is inefficient 
and (b) an  important  effort  should  be  invested  in order  to  carry  out  the examination 
process. Clearly, these two limitations jeopardize the applicability of such examination 

448 

S.F. Ochoa et al. 

techniques.  This  paper  presented  a  mobile  collaborative  examination  tool  (MOCET) 
that helps overcome these limitations. Particularly, the tool implements a variation of 
CET and it has been formally used in collaborative examination activities in courses of 
computer  science  and  engineering  undergraduate  carriers.  Although  the  obtained 
results are still not enough, it is expected this solution produces the following benefits 
to students and instructors/assistants:  

Benefits for Students. Students using Tablet PCs and PDAs could execute part of the 
pre and post-test in a distributed and flexible way (traveling in a subway, waiting the 
bus  or  just  walking),  taking  advantage  of  the  mobility  of  these  devices,  their 
capabilities  to  form  ad-hoc  networks  and  to  share  information  in  an  easy  way. 
Provided  the  shared  information  (strokes,  images,  text,  audio)  is  stored  in  XML 
format, the knowledge distribution among participants can be easily done using XML 
file synchronizations. It means the effort a user has to spend to be synchronized with 
the  instructor  and  his/her  partners  is  just  push  a  button  on  the  users  interface  (low 
cost).  Because  the  tool  supports  for  hand-writing,  students  are  able  to  complete  an 
exam in similar way to the traditional exams (writing a paper), avoiding being victims 
of the change of paradigm. Once completed each phase of the examination process, 
students  and  instructors  can  get  immediate  evaluations  and  download  the  results  in 
their mobile devices for a later analysis/study. In addition, we expect students can get 
the benefits reported in [9]: (a) an the increment of their knowledge because of these 
collaborative examination activities and (b) a feeling this technique is fair to evaluate 
the acquired knowledge by them. 

Benefits  for  Instructors/Assistants.  Instructors/assistants  use  mobile  devices  (Tablet 
PC or PDA) to collect, review and correct the students’ outcomes in every phase of 
the  examination  process.  The  correction  process  and  the  feedback  delivery  can  be 
done  by  the  instructor  in  several  places  (traveling  in  a  bus  or  staying  in  a  waiting 
room) and circumstances (talking in the sidewalk or in a coffee shop). Instructors can 
use  such  devices  during  preparedness  of  the  activity  and  during  the  analysis  of  the 
obtained results. Because the process phases are automated by MOCET, the effort the 
instructor has to spend in order to apply the examination technique is low. In addition, 
the  settings  defined  for  an  examination  process  can  be  reused  of  mixed  with  other 
ones. It allows instructors to share these setting with the partners and to get new ones, 
reducing  thus  the  examination  preparedness  effort.  We  expect  these  advantages  can 
be  reach  by  students  and  instructors/assistants  in  a  broad  range  of  instructional 
scenarios: from middle-school courses to postgraduate programs. 

Provided  the  obtained  results  are  encouraging,  we  envision  this  proposal  can 
provide  a  transversal  solution  able  to  support  examination  on  several  educational 
institutions (from middle-school to universities) and adhering to several instructional 
strategies, such as: Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL), ComputerIntegrated 
Classroom (CIC) and Active Learning, among others. In the short term, we 
have planned to apply MOCET in other engineering courses in Chile. 

Acknowledgements.  This  work  was  partially  supported  by  Fondecyt  (Chile),  grant 
Nº: 11060467 and by MECESUP (Chile) Project Nº UCH0109. 

 

MOCET: A MObile Collaborative Examination Tool 

449 

References 

[1]  Aronson, E., Patnoe, S.: The Jigsaw Classroom: Building Cooperation in the Classroom. 

Longman, New York (1997) 

[2]  Center  for  the  Improvement  of  Instruction.  Teaching  at  the  University  of  Wisconsin-
Madison:  A  Sourcebook.  Chapter  16:  Exams  &  Quizzes.  Madison,  WI:  University  of 
Wisconsin at Milwaukee (1990) 

[3]  Ebel,  R.,  Frisbie,  D.:  Essential  of  Education  Measurement,  4th  edn.  Prentice-Hall, 

Englewood Cliffs, NJ (1986) 

[4]  Guerrero,  L.,  Ochoa,  S.,  Pino,  J.,  Collazos,  C.:  Selecting  Devices  to  Support  Mobile 
Collaboration.  In:  Group  Decision  and  Negotiation,  vol. 15(3),  pp.  243–271.  Springer, 
Netherlands (2006) 

[5]  Hay, 

I.:  Examinations:  Achievement  Tests.  Journal  of  Geography 

in  Higher 

Education 20(1), 137–142 (1996) 

[6]  Kagan, S.: Cooperative Learning. San Juan Capistrano, CA. Kagan Cooperative Learning, 

CA, USA (1992) 

[7]  Neyem,  A.,  Ochoa,  S.,  Pino,  J.,  Guerrero,  L.:  Sharing  Information  Resources  in  Mobile 
Ad-hoc Networks. In: Fukś, H., Lukosch, S., Salgado, A.C. (eds.) CRIWG 2005. LNCS, 
vol. 3706, pp. 351–358. Springer, Heidelberg (2005) 

[8]  Neyem, A., Ochoa, S., Pino, J.: A Strategy to Share Documents in MANETs using Mobile 

Devices. Accepted in ICACT 2006. Phoenix Park, Korea (February 2006) 

[9]  Ochoa,  S.,  Guerrero,  L.,  Pino,  J.,  Collazos,  C.,  Fuller,  D.:  Improving  Learning  by 
Collaborative  Testing.  The  Journal  of  Student  Centered  Learning  (JSCL).  Forum  Press. 
USA. 1(3), pp. 123–135 (2003) 

