Mediating Asymmetries in Family Communication:

Supporting the eInclusion of Older Adults

Francisco J. Gutierrez1(✉), Sergio F. Ochoa1, and Julita Vassileva2
1 Computer Science Department, University of Chile, Beauchef 851,

3rd Floor, Santiago, Chile

2 Computer Science Department, University of Saskatchewan, 176 Thorvaldson Bldg.,

{frgutier,sochoa}@dcc.uchile.cl

110 Science Place, Saskatoon, SK S7N 5C9, Canada

jiv@cs.usask.ca

Abstract.  Background: The rise of mobile Web-based technologies has diver‐
siﬁed the mechanisms used by people to socialize, which results in issues in family
communication. Among these concerns, the reluctance  of older adults  to use
digital media may cause them social isolation, leading to negative eﬀects in their
physical and mental health.

Objective: This paper aims to formalize a model to mediate asymmetries in

cross-generational communication and support the eInclusion of older adults.

Methods: We conducted semi-structured interviews to the members of 20
cross-generational families. Following the grounded theory approach, we iden‐
tiﬁed emerging themes regarding asymmetries in family communication practices
when older adults are involved. We then derived and formalized computer-based
mediation strategies using a model-driven engineering approach.

Results: We identiﬁed three main sources of asymmetries: (1) implicit family
agreements in terms of social interaction, (2) capability and preferences for using
particular  media,  and  (3)  unbalanced  socio-aﬀective  coupling  between  the
involved parties. The proposed model addresses these asymmetries and provides
strategies to coordinate the communication eﬀort of family members with their
elders.

Conclusions:  By  using  the  proposed  model,  designers  of  software  that
supports family communities can conceive eﬀective mechanisms to coordinate
and mediate social communication among cross-generational family members
through digital means. This allows the elderly to show a better reaction to digital
media, thus facilitating their acceptance and appropriation of information tech‐
nologies.

Keywords: Family  communication  ·  Older  adults  ·  Asymmetry  ·  Model  ·
Mediation · Social and digital inclusion

1

Introduction

As a society, we experience our lives as much more dynamic than ever, being mainly
focused on reaching individual goals [11]. The downside is that time for socializing is

© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
M. Antona and C. Stephanidis (Eds.): UAHCI 2015, Part I, LNCS 9175, pp. 438–448, 2015.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-20678-3_42

Mediating Asymmetries in Family Communication

439

reduced [22]. Therefore, people ﬁnd in social media (e.g. email, social networking serv‐
ices and videoconference) an eﬃcient way to interact with others, because these mech‐
anisms provide ubiquity, ﬂexibility and eﬃciency.

In the case of intergenerational families, this social interaction paradigm typically
produces a communication gap between older adults and the rest of the families [20].
Some of the causes that explain this gap can be found in elders being reluctant to use
technology, even for socializing [8]. Consequently, older adults become more and more
socially isolated [14]. Although most elders are eager to address this technological shift,
they usually fail due to their physical and cognitive limitations produced by the aging
process [5, 12]. Therefore, they need support and guidance to face this complex scenario
in a pleasant way [26]. Otherwise, technological adoption by older adults dramatically
diminishes.

This paper proposes a model of computer-mediated communication strategies to
facilitate the eInclusion of elderly people. In order to improve user acceptance, such
mediation strategies need to consider the interaction preferences of each party.

Although promoting social interaction among family members is a commendable
objective, such interaction must not overwhelm people having little time for socializing.
Therefore, eﬀective mediation strategies should intelligently coordinate all the members
in a family community based on speciﬁc criteria, such as location, time of day, and the
available communication media to support the interaction. This necessarily implies that
such mediation process should be adapted to both, the individual’s interests and those
shared among groups of his/her community. Besides, a mediator system should not be
too proactive, since people will eventually refuse to react when there is no urgency, and
therefore would not respond in a really important situation. In this interaction scenario,
understanding the social and technological context of the involved people is fundamental
to ensure the success of the social mediation process.

As a ﬁrst attempt to tackle the social personalization issues inherent to the proposed
communication mediator, we conducted an interview study in cross-generational fami‐
lies. We had a particular interest in understanding communication practices from and
toward the elderly, as well as identifying the perceived issues by the latter in a digital
communication scenario. By acquiring such knowledge, we identiﬁed an initial set of
variables  that  characterize  communication  asymmetry  in  cross-generational  family
communities. We synthesized these ﬁndings into a model, aiming to provide social
personalization when mediating the communication process between two people. Then,
we  derived  a  set  of  computer-based  mediation  strategies  aiming  to  connect  family
members and favoring the eInclusion of the elderly.

Our proposal suggests that the identiﬁed asymmetries can be covered by aligning
preferences in diﬀerent levels: communication media, socializing capability, availa‐
bility for socializing, and routine ﬂexibility. Besides, asymmetries in the social link
between two people also shape how the mediation process needs to be modeled, espe‐
cially in terms of who will be the initiator and how long the mediation will take. If the
asymmetries between them turn to be too large to be resolved solely by both parties,
the introduction of a third family member into the communication process, acting as a
communication broker, would be necessary.

440

F.J. Gutierrez et al.

The rest of the article is structured as follows. Section 2 reviews recent literature on
family connection from a HCI perspective, and discusses the role of technology as
impeller of eInclusion in older adults as well as the issues that need to be overcome.
Next section presents and formalizes the model proposed to address asymmetries in
cross-generational family communication. Section 4 shows how computer-based medi‐
ation strategies can be derived from the proposed model. Finally, Sect. 5 concludes and
provides future research directions.

2 Related Work

With the proliferation of social media and ubiquitous technology for communicating
with family and friends, it is likely that older adults face increasing challenges when
interacting with their younger relatives, who typically use those kinds of supporting
technology to socialize [16, 17]. In fact, while most family members desire to enhance
their communication with at least one relative, literature suggests that in practice this
process is diﬃcult to achieve due to social or technological concerns [28].

When looking deeper into family communication practices, some forms of interac‐
tion do not necessarily involve an explicit sharing of messages between older adults and
their  close  family  members,  but  rather  an  ongoing  awareness  of  the  other  party’s
communication state [24]. In other words, people use both personal and environmental
cues to help them understand what is happening to the other communication party.
Furthermore, Lindley [18] found that elders usually prefer a prolonged contact, which
is typically oﬀered by synchronous media (e.g. through face-to-face or phone commu‐
nication); in turn, asynchronous communication oﬀers advantages to facilitate inter‐
generational  exchanges,  such  as  adapting  communication  time  to  a  schedule,  and
providing control over how much eﬀort is dedicated to this kind of interaction.

The eInclusion of older adults through social media or social networking services
can eﬀectively assist the integration of the elderly to their families [6]. In addition, it
also empowers them with social engagement and self-expression tools [29]. There is
also evidence that one of the main beneﬁts of social media usage by older adults is the
possibility to enhance their social linking with younger family members, which even‐
tually tends to be appreciated by both parties [23]. Indeed, Bell et al. [3] found that older
adults who actively use Facebook state that their main reason to use the platform is to
stay connected with their families.

Unfortunately, most older adults do not feel capable of using digital media [13],
and therefore are not able to beneﬁt from them. Therefore, when designing software
that support social interaction and social presence for families (particularly if they
include  older adults), there is  an  explicit need  to consider  face-to-face interaction,
provide presence awareness mechanisms, assume heterogeneous preferences of social
media, allow the mutual social interaction, and properly address usability and acces‐
sibility concerns [19].

Several eﬀorts have been done in order to bridge this interaction gap. For instance,
Cao et al. [4] identiﬁed design implications for facilitating family communication when
its members are located in diﬀerent time zones. Baecker et al. [2], Cornejo et al. [7],

Mediating Asymmetries in Family Communication

441

Garattini et al. [10], Judge et al. [15], Lindley [18], Muñoz et al. [20], and Rodríguez et
al. [25] have adopted a diﬀerent approach to deal with that challenge. They designed
speciﬁc domestic media spaces where remote family members, particularly older adults,
can connect with each other using video-mediated communication and others kinds of
messaging mechanisms. These social media spaces aim to integrate older adults into
their families, and also reduce and prevent eventual negative eﬀects of social isolation.
In summary, the literature indicates that these asymmetries can indeed jeopardize
communication among members in a family community. Furthermore, since diﬀerent
generations have diﬀerent preferences regarding what media they are able or willing to
use under a particular social context, it is necessary to follow a personalized approach
when facilitating and/or mediating communication between two family members. This
is particularly relevant when communication is targeted to be performed with older
adults, since further restrictions limit the ways in which the mediation process can be
conducted. By actively considering the needs and concerns of older adults into the design
of computer-based strategies that mediate asymmetries in family communication, soft‐
ware designers can conceive usable and accessible services that would naturally help
enhance the technology appropriation by the elderly, thus favoring their eInclusion.

3 A Model to Mediate Asymmetries in Family Communication

In this section we ﬁrst present the methodology followed to collect the information used
to build the model. Then, we present and describe the formal model proposed to mediate
asymmetries in family communication. This model intends to support social interaction
among members of middle-class family communities living in urban areas, in Chile.
The model particularly considers the interactions from/to older adults. Possible exten‐
sions to this model and its application to other social realities are part of the future work.

3.1 Data Collection Methodology
In order to identify not only asymmetries in cross-generational family communication
practices, but also the features that characterize a family community, we used two main
data sources: (1) a literature review of the most recent systems designed to enable and
facilitate family communication, particularly when they involve older adults, and (2) a
qualitative interview study.

We conducted semi-structured interviews with the members of 20 cross-generational
middle-class families living in urban settlements. For convenience reasons, we focused
our  study  in  the  metropolitan  area  of  Santiago,  Chile  and  we  followed  a  snowball
sampling  strategy  to  recruit  the  participants.  In  each  family  we  interviewed  three
members: an older adult, an adult, and a teenager. Out of the 60 participants, 25 were
men (42 %) and 35 were women (58 %). The interviews were held at the participants’
homes. Beforehand, we conducted a small-scale pilot study with three families in order
to identify and resolve wording and ambiguous statements in the interview script.

In order to identify emerging themes on cross-generational asymmetries in family
communication, we followed the grounded theory approach. Indeed, this resonates with

442

F.J. Gutierrez et al.

current recommendations and research trends in human-computer interaction [1]. Each
interview was tape-recorded with the explicit, free and informed consent of each partic‐
ipant. They were later transcribed, processed through open, axial and selective coding,
and analyzed by the authors.

By contrasting the obtained ﬁndings with the existing literature, we built a model
covering the main characteristics, issues, and social expectations of the stakeholders
involved in a family community scenario. Next section presents and formalizes the
proposal following the model-driven engineering approach.

3.2 Family Communication Metamodel
Communication in family communities can be represented as a metamodel, where each
particular family is an instance of such abstract structure. This conception adheres to
the model-driven engineering approach [27], and it can be easily implemented using
existing tools, such as Eclipse Process Framework [9]. Figure 1 shows the UML class
diagram that represents the metamodel.

Interaction 
Preferences

0..n

Family

1..n

Member

2

2

0..n

Relationship

1

0..n

Interaction

1

0..n

Decision

0..n

1

Rules

1

0..n

Interaction 
Agreement

Context

1

0..n

0..n

0..n
Behavioral 
Patterns

0..n
Emotional 

Status

1

1
1

Interaction 

Need

Fig. 1. Family communication metamodel

This representation considers a  family as composed at least by a  member. Each
member has interaction preferences (e.g., preferred tools to conduct synchronous and
asynchronous  communication),  emotional  status  (set of emotions  detected during  a
certain time window) and eventually  behavioral patterns that determine the way in
which a person is going to behave under particular circumstances. Every pair of members
in a family community has a relationship, which includes several variables that range
from the aﬀective attachment among them, to their formal relatedness. There could be
an implicit and/or explicit interaction agreement between these pairs, which establishes
the interaction frequency and also the time space and digital media involved in these
interactions. Based on these agreements, and also in the emotion status of each member,

Mediating Asymmetries in Family Communication

443

it is possible to determine interaction needs, which represent people that are currently
in need of emotional support.

Every interaction need has a context that determines who, how and when other family
members could deal with such emotional support. Provided that various family members
can potentially intervene in that situation, and trying to not overloading all of them, one
or more decisions should be made concerning who will be encouraged to provide support
to the member in need. The decision process can be repeated until getting a successful
result or using up all the available alternatives.

Decisions are made using a set of rules that indicate how to intervene a relationship
considering the social needs of the involved people and their behavioral patterns. The
decision  process  also  considers  the  historical  record  of  interactions  between  these
people. Each decision is translated into particular actions that are made by the system
mediating the communication among family members; e.g., an invitation message can
be received by a person for contacting other family member that is currently in need of
external support. Such an action can be materialized in an interaction, or eventually it
can fail. In the latter case, a new decision could be made. Next section describes the
process that each particular family communication model uses in order to promote the
social interaction from/to older adults.

3.3 Processing the Family Communication Model
This process  involves four  uncoupled  stages:  data  gathering,  monitoring,  decisionmaking,
 and intervention (Fig. 2). Rectangles represent classes of the family model
described in the previous section, while rounded rectangles represent processes. Next
we explain each model component.

Family Setting

Interaction Sensor

Family

Member

Relationship

User 

Preferences

Interaction 
Agreement

Interaction

Emotional 

Status

Interaction Needs 

Evaluator

Interaction Need

Behavioral 
Patterns

Interaction Analyzer

Decision Validator

Rules

Decision Maker

Context

Decision

Intervention 

Manager

DATA GATHERING

MONITORING

DECISION MAKING

INTERVENTION

Fig. 2. Basic architecture of the model processing

Data Gathering. This stage is in charge of obtaining the basic data of the system; e.g.
family composition, user preferences and their interaction agreement. This information
is provided through a family setting process, which is performed when the community
is created. There is also information that is not provided by the end-users (i.e. family
members), but that is automatically captured by the system, and also used as input.
Examples of this information are the current emotional status of a family member, or

444

F.J. Gutierrez et al.

the interactions performed by the participants in a community. Various social media
tools, like SocialConnector [21], can act as interaction sensors capturing and recording
this information.
Monitoring. This stage adds meaning to the basic information captured in the previous
stage. The system tries to determine if there are new interaction needs that should be
addressed. Particularly, the interaction needs evaluator analyzes the basic information
of family members as well as their emotional status to determine if there is a new need
for social support. If it does, the process records such need in the system, and then other
components are going to address it. Such need can also be identiﬁed by comparing the
interaction agreement between each pair of members, and their eﬀective interaction
record. The analysis of interactions is also used to determine or adjust behavioral patterns
of a user or his/her interaction preferences. The interaction analyzer is the process in
charge of performing these activities. Finally, the decision validator process tries to
determine if an eﬀective interaction recorded by the system is the result of a stimulus
triggered by the system to a user; i.e., a decision made by the system to promote the
interaction between two people. If it does, the result is recorded and then used to make
future decisions.
Decision-Making. This stage takes each interaction need recorded in the communica‐
tion model, and based on the behavioral patterns and the basic information gathered in
the ﬁrst stage, determines a set of zero or more actions that could be taken to support
the people in need. These actions can either be to trigger participation using persuasive
strategies, or to raise an alarm and consequently provide awareness on the possible need
to family members. The decision maker is the process that determines which decision
will be made in each situation. Such process uses a set of rules as support, and makes
one or more decisions. Each decision represents a stimulus to a user. The information
about these decisions and also about the context in which they were made, is properly
recorded in the system.
Intervention. In this stage, the intervention manager processes each decision and acts
accordingly. A speciﬁc action is made by the system per each decision (e.g. send an
email, or show an awareness component to the user). The actions can be successful or
not. Regardless the results of an action, such an action and its result are properly recorded
in the model, because they are then used to improve the decision-making process.

Figure 3 shows the software architecture of a social media tool that uses the proposed
model to promote interactions among family members, mainly from/to older adults. In
this case, we indicate how the model can be embedded into the SocialConnector tool
[21] to reach such a goal. SocialConnector, as most social mediators, allows family
members to interact using communication mechanisms like videoconferences (through
Skype), emails and sharing contents (through Facebook). However, these tools do not
identify when a person is in need of external support nor persuade other family members
to help reduce or mitigate such situation. That role can be played by the proposed inter‐
vention model, which is complementary to the existing tools and can be added as an
extension.

Mediating Asymmetries in Family Communication

445

Family Setting

Intervention 

Manager

SOCIAL MEDIA 

TOOL 

(SocialConnector)

INTERVENTION

Decision Maker

DECISION MAKING

Interaction 

Sensor

Interaction 

Needs Evaluator

Interaction 
Analyzer

Decision 
Validator

MONITORING 

(SENSING)

Family

Member

Relationship

Emotional 

Status

Interaction Need

User 

Preferences

Interaction 
Agreement

DATA 

PRESISTANCE

Interaction

Behavioral 
Patterns

Context

Rules

Decision

Fig. 3. Architecture of a social media tool that uses the proposed model

As most modern software tools, we propose to separate the design concerns using
layers. In this case, the software extension should involve four layers: data persistence,
monitoring,  decision-making  and  intervention.  This  matches  with  the  stages  of  the
process used to compute the model (Fig. 2). The components and roles of each layer are
also those mentioned for the model processing.

4 Using the Model

In order to illustrate the use of this model as a support for SocialConnector, let us
consider a family community composed by twelve members: two older adults (OA),
four  adults  (Ad)  and  six  young  people  (YP).  Considering  the  relationship  existing
between them (in terms of social interaction), we can build an interaction graph similar
to the one shown in Fig. 4. The diﬀerent types of links indicate how strong is the aﬀective
relationship between each pair of nodes (i.e., between two family members).

Let us suppose that the system detects that OA2 has been with a negative mood
during the whole morning. Such detection is done by the interaction needs evaluator
(Figs. 2 and 3), which creates and records a new need in the persistence layer (i.e., it
creates a new instance of the class interaction need). Then, the decision maker compo‐
nent should determine, based on the set of available rules and the context describing that
situation, how to support the person in need. By analyzing the graph, we can see that
Ad-3 and OA-1 are the closest family members for OA-2. Probably, the ﬁrst priority
should be to try contacting Ad-3 because adult people usually have better capabilities
to deal with problems than older adults. However, Ad-3 would be the ﬁrst option only

446

F.J. Gutierrez et al.

OA-1

OA-2

Ad-1

Ad-2

Ad-3

Ad-4

YP-1

YP-3

YP-5

YP-2

YP-4

YP-6

OA-* Older Adult

Ad-*

 Adult

YP-* Young People

Strong affective 

link

Formal affective 

link

Weak/No affective 

link

Fig. 4. Example of a simpliﬁed family community graph

if the interaction agreement between Ad-3 and OA-2, and also their interaction pref‐
erences, are aligned. In other case, other options must be analyzed.

Once the model determines the most suitable family member to help in this situation,
it should make one or more decisions. The decisions are stored in the corresponding
class of the model. Each decision triggers an action that the system must perform auton‐
omously in order to persuade the chosen member (e.g., Ad-3) to help the person in need.
These actions could be either sending an email or instant message to Ad-3 informing
such  a  situation.  The  intervention  manager  component  is  in  charge  perform  these
actions. The result of each action should be veriﬁed or guessed (in the worst case) by
the system, in order to determine if new decisions should be made because all of the
stimuli to Ad-3 failed. Thus, the system uses the model to determine second options,
and so on until exhaust all the available intervention alternatives, or eventually succeed.

5 Conclusion and Future Work

Asymmetries are inherent to family communication, particularly when they involve
intergenerational members. While some people perceive their ability to adapt to other’s
preferences as natural in terms of communication media and ﬂexibility, external medi‐
ation usually needs to be performed in order to increase the chances of eﬀective commu‐
nication.

After  conducting  a literature  review  and  a  qualitative  interview  study,  we  have
identiﬁed asymmetry sources related to: media preference, socializing capability, the

Mediating Asymmetries in Family Communication

447

availability of both parties, and their ﬂexibility for performing social interaction. The
quality and strength of the aﬀective tie between the involved parties is also relevant
when studying family communication. In particular, if the asymmetries between two
people appear to be quite strong, the inclusion of a third person acting as a broker in the
mediation  process  is  recommended,  as  it  is  already  naturally  considered  in  family
settings.

By providing eﬀective mechanisms to coordinate and mediate social communication
among family members through digital means, the elderly appear to show a better reac‐
tion to digital media. This facilitates not only their social inclusion to their families, but
also to their acceptance and appropriation of ICTs.

As future work we are embedding this model (and its processing) into the Social‐
Connector  system  [21].  Then,  we will evaluate in the  ﬁeld  the  model performance
through empirical studies that would allow us to determine its impact, as well as gath‐
ering feedback to improve it.

Acknowledgements.  This work has been partially supported by the Fondecyt Project (Chile),
grant: 1150252. The work of Francisco J. Gutierrez has been supported by the Ph.D. Scholarship
Program of Conicyt Chile (CONICYT-PCHA/Doctorado Nacional/2013-21130075).

References

1. Adams, A., Lunt, P., Cairns, P.: A qualitative approach to HCI research. In: Cairns, P., Cox,
A. (eds.) Research Methods for Human-Computer Interaction. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge (2008)

2. Baecker, R., Sellen, K., Crosskey, S., Boscart, V., Barbosa Neves, B.: Technology to reduce
social isolation and loneliness. In: Proceedings of ASSETS 2014, Rochester, USA, pp. 27–
34. ACM Press (2014)

3. Bell, C., Fausset, C., Farmer, S., Nguyen, J., Harley, L., Fain, W.B.: Examining social media
use among older adults. In: Proceedings of HT 2013, Paris, France, pp. 158–163. ACM Press
(2013)

4. Cao, X., Sellen, A., Bernheim Brush, A.J., Kirk, D., Edge, D., Ding, X.: Understanding family
communication across time zones. In: Proceedings of CSCW 2010, Savannah, USA, pp. 155–
158. ACM Press (2010)

5. Carmichael, A.: Style Guide for the Design of Interactive Television Services for the Elderly

Viewers. Independent Television Commission, Winchester, UK (1999)

6. Cornejo,  R.,  Tentori,  M.,  Favela,  J.:  Ambient  awareness  to  strengthen  the  family  social

network of older adults. Comput. Support. Coop. Work 22, 309–344 (2013)

7. Cornejo, R., Tentori, M., Favela, J.: Enriching in-person encounters through social media: a
study on family connectedness for the elderly. Int. J. Hum.-Comput. Stud. 71(9), 889–899
(2013)

8. Czaja, S.J., Charness, N., Fisk, A.D., Hertzog, C., Nair, S.N., Rogers, W.A., Sharit, J.: Factors

predicting the use of technology. Psychol. Aging 21, 333–352 (2006)

9. The Eclipse Foundation. Eclipse Process Framework Project (EPF). http://eclipse.org/epf/.

Accessed 29 Dec 2014

10. Garattini,  C.,  Wherton,  J.,  Prendergast,  D.:  Linking  the  lonely:  an  exploration  of  a
communication technology designed to support social interaction among older adults. Univ.
Access Inf. Soc. 11(2), 211–222 (2012)

448

F.J. Gutierrez et al.

11. Giddens, A.: Conversations with Anthony Giddens: Making Sense of Modernity. Stanford

University Press, Palo Alto (1998)

12. Hawthorn, D.: Possible implications of aging for interface designers. Interact. Comput. 12,

151–156 (2000)

13. Hope,  A.,  Schwaba,  T.,  Piper,  A.M.:  Understanding  digital  and  material  social
communications for older adults. In: Proceedings of CHI 2014, Toronto, Canada, pp. 3903–
3912. ACM Press (2014)

14. House, J.S.: Social isolation kills, but how and why? Psychosom. Med. 63, 273–274 (2001)
15. Judge,  T.K.,  Neustaedter,  C.,  Harrison,  S.:  Inter-family  messaging  with  domestic  media
spaces. In: Neustaedter, C., Harrison, S., Sellen, A. (eds.) Connecting Families, pp. 141–157.
Springer, London (2013)

16. Lindley,  S.E.,  Harper,  R.,  Sellen,  A.:  Designing  for  elders:  exploring  the  complexity  of
relationships in later life. In: Proceedings of British-HCI 2008, Liverpool, UK, pp. 77–86.
British Computer Society (2008)

17. Lindley, S.E., Harper, R., Sellen, A.: Desiring to be in touch in a changing communications
landscape: attitudes of older adults. In: Proceedings of CHI 2009, Boston, USA, pp. 1693–
1702. ACM Press (2009)

18. Lindley, S.E.: Shades of lightweight: supporting cross-generational communication through

home messaging. Univ. Access Inf. Soc. 11(1), 31–43 (2012)

19. Moser,  C.,  Fuchsberger,  V.,  Neureiter,  K.,  Shellner,  W.,  Tscheligi,  M.:  Elderly’s  social
presence  supported  by  ICTs:  investigating  user  requirements  for  social  presence.  In:
Proceedings of SocialCom 2011, Boston, USA, pp. 738–741. IEEE Press (2011)

20. Muñoz, D., Cornejo, R., Gutierrez, F.J., Favela, J., Ochoa, S.F., Tentori, M.: A social cloudbased 
tool to deal with time and media mismatch of intergenerational family communication.
Future Gener. Comput. Syst. (2014). http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2014.07.003

21. Muñoz, D., Gutierrez, F.J., Ochoa, S.F., Baloian, N.: SocialConnector: a ubiquitous system
to ease the social interaction among family community members. Int. J. Comput. Syst. Sci.
Eng. 30, 57–68 (2014)

22. Neal, A.G., Collas, S.F.: Intimacy and Alienation: Forms of Estrangement in Female/Male

Relationships. Garland Publishing, New York (2000)

23. Nef, T., Ganea, R.L., Müri, R.M., Mosinmann, U.P.: Social networking sites and older users

– a systematic review. Int. Psychogeriatr. 25(7), 1041–1053 (2013)

24. Riche, Y., Mackay, W.: PeerCare: supporting awareness of rhythms and routines for better

aging in place. Comput. Support. Coop. Work 19, 73–104 (2010)

25. Rodríguez, M.D., Gonzalez, V.M., Favela, J., Santana, P.C.: Home-based communication
system for older adults and their remote family. Comput. Hum. Behav. 25(3), 609–618 (2009)
26. Roupa, Z., Nikas, M., Gerasimou, E., Zafeiri, V., Giasyrani, L., Kazitori, E., Sotiropoulou,

P.: The use of technology by the elderly. Health Sci. J. 4(2), 118–126 (2010)

27. Schmidt, D.C.: Model-driven engineering. IEEE Comput. 39(2), 25–31 (2006)
28. Tee,  K.,  Brush,  A.J.B.,  Inkpen,  K.M.:  Exploring  communication  and  sharing  between

extended families. Int. J. Hum.-Comput. Stud. 67, 128–138 (2008)

29. Waycott, J., Vetere, F., Pedell, S., Kulik, L., Ozanne, E., Gruner, A., Downs, J.: Older adults
ad digital content producers. In: Proceedings of CHI 2013, Paris, France, pp. 39–48. ACM
Press (2013)

