 

Understanding the Interaction Support  
for Mobile Work in an Emergency Room 

Sergio F. Ochoa1, Alvaro Monares1, Nicolás Ochoa2,  

Ramón Hervás3, and José Bravo3 

1 Computer Science Department, Universidad de Chile, Chile 

{sochoa,amonares}@dcc.uchile.cl 
2 Medical School, Universidad de Chile, Chile 

nico8asa@ug.uchile.cl 

3 MAmI Research Lab, University of Castilla-La Mancha, Ciudad Real, Spain 

{ramon.hlucas,jose.bravo}@uclm.es 

Abstract.  Typically  mobile  and  ubiquitous  software  applications  provide  services 
to mobile workers to help them increase their performance, effectiveness 
and eventually the satisfaction while doing their jobs. These services are directly 
related to the characterization of the activities to be supported. Based on such 
a characterization the designers of these solutions can envision the services that 
should be provided by the new system. Few guidelines are available to characterize 
mobile activities from an IT support point of view, therefore the designers 
have to guess the services to be embedded in these solutions. This paper provides 
 a  first  step  to  address  such  a  problem,  identifying  the  context  variables 
that  characterize  the  mobile  activities.  Moreover,  an ontology  of  activity  characteristics 
 and  some  design  guidelines  are  provided  to  determine  which  
supporting services can be used to address activities according to their characteristics.
 This proposal was conceived based on the empirical observation of the 
work  performed  by  the  medical  personnel  at  an  emergency  room  of  a  public 
hospital.  Further  analysis  is  required  to  generalize  this  proposal,  in  order  to  
address mobile work in other scenarios. 

Keywords:  Ubiquitous  computing,  mobile  computing,  mobile  work,  activity 
characterization, context-aware information delivery, design guidelines. 

1 

Introduction  

Advances in mobile technology and wireless communication have opened a space for 
the development of new computing paradigms, such as mobile and ubiquitous computing.
 These paradigms consider a user that is on the move carrying a computing device 
(e.g. smartphone) as support of his/her activities.  

Software applications involved in these computing paradigms typically adapt their 
services and user interfaces according to users’ current context. Such a context could 
consider, e.g., the level of noise and light in the work environment, the availability of 
Internet access, and the type of mobility and position of the user. Due the user is on 

M. Kurosu (Ed.): Human-Computer Interaction, Part III, HCII 2014, LNCS 8512, pp. 312–322, 2014. 
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014 

 

Understanding the Interaction Support for Mobile Work in an Emergency Room 

313 

the  move  when  interacts  with  these  systems,  his/her  current  work  context  changes 
accordingly. Therefore the adaptation of services and user interfaces must be done by 
the  applications  during  runtime.  This  means  that  these  systems  must  also  sense  or 
infer the users’ current context in order to detect changes and trigger accordingly the 
new adaptations to the services or user interfaces. This service adaptation affects the 
performance, effectiveness and satisfaction of mobile workers. Typically, more suitable 
services and user interfaces allow mobile workers to improve their performance, 
effectiveness and satisfaction; therefore this is a goal that follows most designers of 
mobile and ubiquitous applications. 

Although researchers of this area and also the industry have done important efforts 
to determine the context variables are useful to characterize mobile activities, and also 
to relate software services to activities according to their characteristics, the problem 
is still open. Therefore, the designers of these solutions depend on their own expertise 
to determine the supporting services to be embedded in the new system. The system is 
usually discarded by the user if the services identified by the designer are not suitable 
to support the activity.  

This lack of visibility that the designers have about the services to be embedded in 
mobile and ubiquitous solutions is common in the development of collaborative systems,
 and this problem is known as the iceberg effect [1]. However, such a problem 
can be successfully addressed using appropriate design guidelines. 

In order to help address the problem, this article reports the results of a user study 
in  which  we  use  used  mobile  structured  observations  to  shadow  mobile  workers 
(mainly  physicians,  nurses  and  medical  interns)  during  their  regular  activities  at  an 
emergency  room  (ER)  of  a  public  hospital.  The  interaction  among  mobile  workers 
and  also  between  them  and  the  information  supporting  the  tasks,  were  particularly 
observed and recorded. The study involved four sessions of direct observation at the 
ER.  Each  session  lasted  three  hours  and  involved  two  observers.  Various  informal 
meetings and two focus groups were performed with the health professionals participating 
in the study, in order to analyze, discuss and clarify the information obtained 
from these observations.  

The analysis of this information allowed us  to determine an initial  set of context 
variables that characterize these activities and influence the mobile workers’ performance,
  effectiveness  and  satisfaction  while  doing  these  tasks.  Although  the  study 
results only consider the mobile activities in an emergency room, the proposed characterization 
could also be applicable to other dynamic work processes, like construction 
inspections, search-and-rescues or emergency responses.  

This characterization also helps analyze the interaction support required by mobile 
workers to perform their activities and collaborate among them. Thus, designers can 
determine in a more informed way, which are the supporting services that can be required 
 by  the  new  system.  Examples  of  these  services  are  awareness  mechanisms, 
notifications, and capturers of the user attention. The article also presents some design 
guidelines showing how to identify the services required to support mobile activities, 
according to the characteristics of the work to be done.  

Next  section  presents  the  related  work.  Section  3  describes  the  user  study  performed 
in the ER. Based on the study results, Section 4 presents an initial set of con314 


S.F. Ochoa et al. 

text  variables  that  characterize  the  mobile  activities,  the  values  that  these  variables 
can assume, a preliminary ontology of activity characteristics, and also some design 
guidelines indicating how the proposed ontology can used to determine the supporting 
services required by a mobile or ubiquitous application. Section 5 presents the conclusions 
and the future work. 

2 

Related Work 

There is no consensus about the meaning of context in context-aware computing [2]. 
This is because the variables describing the work context depend on each particular 
problem or task to be addressed. This situation has promoted the development of several 
research lines in context-aware computing and also particular definitions for each 
of them. In case of HCI, during the late nineties Rodden et al. [3] stated that the use of 
context allows determining more accurately the information and services that must be 
put available to the users, and thus it is possible to improve the human-computer interaction.
  Several  applications  adopted  such  an  approach,  for  example  the  mobile  
geographic information system proposed by Abowd et al. [4], which provides contextualized 
information to the users depending on their current location. There is also a 
long list of location-aware mobile and ubiquitous systems that self-adapt their users 
interfaces, e.g. to support tourism, entertainment, healthcare and recently social applications 
[5, 6, 7, 8].  

The user location seems to be one of the context variables most used by mobile applications 
 to  adapt  the  services  to  mobile  users  during  runtime.  A  recent  study  performed 
by Herskovic et al. [9] on mobile users presence awareness, which involved 
engineering students, indicates that users location and status are highly useful context 
variables according to these users. In a posterior and more general study, which also 
involved a literature extensive review, these researchers identified a more important 
set  of  context  variables  that  affects  the  collaborative  activities  [10].  Based  on  that, 
they proposed a method to determine the suitability of the awareness services supporting 
 mobile  activities  according  to  their  features  (i.e.  according  to  the  values  of  the 
context variables describing the mobile activity).  

Romero  and  Calvillo-Gámez  [11]  conceptualize  the  optimal  user  experience  (or 
flow) in movement-based interaction while perform mobile activities, and they highlight 
 the  relevance  of  four  key  components:  effortless  attention,  the  context  where 
interaction takes place, the alignment between the task being supported and the application,
 and the body and its role in the interaction with the system. In the same direction 
 (i.e.  user’s  experience)  Duarte  and  Carriço  [12]  investigated  the  reactions  and 
behavior  of  users  exposed  to  certain  awareness  mechanisms  in  videogames  using 
mobile  devices.  That  study  shows  that  the  awareness  information  given  to  a  user 
could  promote  stress  and  anxiety,  or  it  can  support  the  task;  therefore  choosing  the 
right awareness mechanism to deliver the information seems to be mandatory. 

The context information is also used by applications that provide ambient intelligence.
 In these computing paradigms the use of the context variables becomes richer 
and mandatory. For example the Portable Help Desk proposed by Garlan et al. [13] 

 

 

Understanding the Interaction Support for Mobile Work in an Emergency Room 

315 

provides spatial and temporal awareness information (e.g. the nearest printer, cafeteria 
or resource) to users of handheld devices. This software has an audio and a graphical 
interface, and the use of a particular interface will depend on the user’s current mobility.
 Sukthankar [14] proposes also a context-aware application that uses multiple projectors 
 to  simultaneously  illuminate  an  ambient  and  provide  information  to  users. 
Depending on the user position and orientation, these projectors deliver the information 
through the most appropriate projector.  

While Breiner et al. [15] propose a model-based framework for generating contextaware 
user interfaces for ambient intelligence systems. The proposal provides guidelines 
for creating new models and mechanisms for adapting the user interface during 
runtime according to changing user needs. Although the framework is interesting, it 
considers the users characteristics as the only context dimension to adapt the system 
interfaces.  

Concerning the analysis of the activity features to determine possible services to be 
required in  mobile and ubiquitous applications, Guerrero et al. [16] characterize the 
activities also considering the environment in which they are performed. That characterization 
only considers three dimensions: comfort of the work place, mobility level 
of  the  user,  and  level  of  data  input  that  is  required  by  the  activity.  Based  on  it,  the 
authors recommend suitable devices to be used as support of that mobile activity. 

In the same reasoning line, Alarcon et al. [17] proposes a framework of contextual 
elements to be considered during the conception, analysis and design of mobile collaborative 
applications. That framework helps designers to identify non-functional and 
also some functional requirements of these systems, according the context of the activity 
to be supported. Tentori and Favela [18] propose a set of coarse-grained activities 
 (monitored,  distributed  and  dynamic  activities)  that  nurses  regularly  perform  as 
part of their hospital work. However, this characterization is too general, and it does 
not  allow  us  to  identify  the  services  required  by  the  applications  supporting  these 
activities.  

Although  these  proposals  are  useful,  they  are  not  particularly  suitable  to  address 
the  problem  stated  in  section  1.  Therefore,  the  designers  of  mobile  and  ubiquitous 
applications will be exposed to the iceberg effect [1] every time that they try to determine 
the supporting services to be embedded in their solutions.  Next section describes 
the  user study that  helped us to  find the context  variables characterizing the 
mobile activities and find the services required to support them. 

3 

The User Study 

This user study was done in an emergency room (ER) at a public hospital in Santiago, 
Chile. Such an area was composed of a large space with “pods” for patient treatment, 
and a small area for patient registration. That area was covered by a Wi-Fi network 
with  access  to  Internet.  Next  we  describe  the  study  area,  the  regular  activities  performed 
in such an area, and the type of monitoring done to the mobile workers participating 
in the study. 

 

316 

S.F. Ochoa et al. 

3.1 

Setting of the Study Area 

The emergency room was an area of 20 meters by 11 meters approximately composed 
of small pods for basic healthcare attention. Figure 1 presents a diagram that shows 
the space distribution. These pods (26 in total) were isolated by curtains. One of them 
was used as control room, in which a nurse updates the patients records annotating the 
main  treatments  and  health  procedures  indicated  for  these  people.  That  nurse  also 
recorded the time at which the patient gets in and out the ER. 

 

 

 

Fig. 1. Space distribution at the emergency room 

One  emergency  physician,  two  physicians  (usually  surgeons  and  internists),  four 
nurses and three medical interns were part of the permanent staff assigned to such an 
ER. Depending on the activity in that place and the patients’ health conditions, additional 
medical personnel from the hospital can also support the emergency room activities.
 In this study we observed and interview only people of the permanent staff, 
particularly two physicians, three nurses and two medical interns. 

3.2  Activities and Roles at the Emergency Room 

People working in an emergency room represent a team,  which goal is  “to  stabilize 
the  patient's  condition  by  treating  the  acute  problem  and  discharging  the  patient” 
[19]. In such a team there are several roles; for instance emergency physicians, internists,
  medical interns,  nurses and paramedics.  According to  the role that each person 
can play and the current needs at the ER, activities are assigned to them.  

An activity involves one or more tasks, which can be performed in sequence, parallel 
 or  mix  of  them.  Example  of  these  activities  can  be  the  process  to  medicate  the 
patients  (by  the  nurse)  according  to  the  indications  of  a  physician,  or  the  diagnosis 
performed  by  an  internist  every  time  that  a  new  patient  arrives  to  the  ER.  Usually, 
these team members perform more than one simultaneous activity during a work shift. 
The work in an ER is highly dynamic and bit chaotic. However, the activities are 
coordinated and monitored by an emergency physician, who usually has an important 
experience managing ERs. The information being shared among the medical personnel 
is handwritten on a paper record that is kept in the pod of the patient. If the patient 

 

 

Understanding the Interaction Support for Mobile Work in an Emergency Room 

317 

is moved from one pod to other, the paper record is also moved with the patient. Typically,
  the  results  of  a  patient’s  health  studies  (e.g.  X-Rays)  are  carried  by  hospital 
personnel to the attention pod of the patient. Then, when the professional monitoring 
the patient arrives to the pod, he reviews the studies’ results and decides the next actions 
 depending  on  his/her  role.  For  instance,  an  emergency  physician  can  keep,  
adjust or change the treatment; however a medical intern or a nurse must contact the 
emergency physician to know how to proceed.  

Periodically the emergency physician in charge of the ER makes a diagnosis of the 
current  situation  to  determine  if  the  activities  are  under  control,  extra  support  is  
required  or  changes  in  the  activities  assignment  must  be  done.  As  we  can  see  from 
this brief description, the work in the ER involves an ample variety of activity types, 
which allows us to identify a rich set of context variables that characterize them.  

3.3  Monitoring Process 

The  activities  performed  by  the  medical  personnel  were  observed  once  a  week,  in 
sessions  of  three  hours.  Four  sessions  were  involved  in  this  study.  Two  observers 
participated in the process; each of them  followed the activities of one professional 
during the observation period. After each session, the observers (who were knowledgeable 
 on  mobile  work)  analyzed  individually  the  collected  information,  and  then 
discussed their eventual findings and conclusions. Such information was then checked 
with the health professionals that were observed, whom eventually had to explain the 
meaning of their actions or behavior in order to help us understand the situation.  

After  the  four  sessions,  we  performed  two  focus  groups  with  the  participants  to  
validate the initial findings and determine the eventual suitability of mobile and ubiquitous 
computing services as support of their work. Next section describes how such 
information was processed to obtain the characteristics of the mobile activities. 

4 

Characterization of Mobile Activities 

The process to identify the context variables that affect the mobile work in an emergency 
 room  was  initially  influenced  by  the  authors’  previous  studies  on  firefighters 
activities during urban emergency responses [10, 17, 20]. These studies allowed us to 
determine an initial set of context variables, which was then modified according to the 
mobile workers behavior observed in the emergency room.  

The procedure to identify these variables considered several steps: (1) identify the 
activities, (2) determine their main characteristics, (3) validate these characterizations 
and  (4)  determine  the  main  variables  affecting  the  activities  performance.  Fifteen 
activities  were  analyzed  and  characterized.  Then,  the  context  variables  with  similar 
meaning  were  grouped.  In  some  cases,  the  activity  characterization  allowed  us  to 
extend the set of values that can be assumed by the context variables. In the rest of 
this  section  we  describe  these  variables  and  an  initial  ontology  that  represents  the 
relationships among these variables.  

 

318 

S.F. Ochoa et al. 

4.1  Context Variables Affecting Mobile Activities 

Although this set of context variables could be then extended, it is complete enough to 
characterize mobile activities and help designers to determine the services required to 
support them. Next we present the context variables that characterize the mobile activities 
and influence the performance of the workers at the emergency room. 

 

Mobility  level. The level of  mobility required by a person (who plays a role) to accomplish 
 the  activity  determines  the  value  of  this  variable  (i.e.  characteristic  of  the 
activity). The values that can be assumed by this context variable are the following: 
stationary, nomadic and mobile. This mobility classification is aligned with the taxonomy 
 proposed  by  Kristoffersen  and  Ljungberg  [21].  In  stationary  activities  the 
mobile worker performs the tasks in a small physical area, staying stationary or having 
very low mobility. Examples of this activity type are the examination of patients 
or the process of getting a blood sample. In both activities the workers must stay in 
the  patient  pods  during  a  time  period  until  they  finish.  Nomadic  activities  typically 
involve a set of stationary tasks, in which the worker must walk from one location to 
another to accomplish them. An example of this activity type is the round performed 
by the nurses to  monitor the  health conditions of the patients.  A  mobile activity requires 
that the worker is on the move almost permanently to accomplish it. Examples 
of mobile activities are the transportation of patients to the imaginology area (e.g. for 
X-Ray) or look for a specialist through the hospital facilities to get an expert opinion. 
Our observations during the study indicate that mobile workers need to be stationary 
(at  least  temporally)  to  read  information  or  make  annotations.  Moreover,  they  can 
read  information  while  walking  only  if  it  is  short,  simple  and  direct.  In  other  case, 
they ignore the information or decide to stop to read it.   

 

Location-dependence.  Some  activities  can  be  done  only  in  specific  places,  while  
others  can  be  performed  almost  in  any  place.  The  location  dependence  variable  
determines  such  a  feature  for  a  mobile  activity;  therefore,  it  can  assume  one  of  the 
following values: location-dependent or location-independent. By location-dependent 
activities  we  mean  those  that  should  be  performed  in  particular  locations  (it  can  be 
one or various locations). For instance, an X-Ray image should be analyzed in an XRay 
illuminator and the medication process of a patient must be done at the patient’s 
pod.  The  location-independent  activities,  e.g.  a  medical  inter-consult  between  two 
physicians, can be done almost in any place. The observations recorded in the study 
indicate that location-dependent activities usually impose physical limitations to mobile 
workers and negatively affect their performance. In some cases, the use of mobile 
computing  and  wireless  communication  technology  can  transform  a  locationdependent 
 activity  in  a  location-independent  one.  For  instance,  an  X-Ray  (image  in 
high  resolution)  can  be  retrieved  and  analyzed  by  the  physician  in  his  tablet  PC, 
avoiding thus going to get the physical image and then  find a X-Ray illuminator to 
read it.    

 

Coupling. The activity coupling establishes the level of interdependence between an 
activity and others being performed during the same time period. This characteristic 
can also be understood as the coordination level required by an activity. The values 

 

 

Understanding the Interaction Support for Mobile Work in an Emergency Room 

319 

that can be assumed by this context variable are: loosely-coupled, tightly-coupled or 
uncoupled.  An  activity  is  loosely-coupled  if  it  is  weakly  dependent  on  each  other. 
Typically, the people performing these activities function autonomously and collaborate 
on-demand during short time periods [22]. A tightly-coupled activity (partially or 
fully) depends on some other activity that is usually being performed in parallel. The 
actions  made  by  a  worker  provide  feedback  to  others,  whom  can  change  their  next 
actions or behavior based on such information. Examples of tightly-coupled activities 
are those performed by a nurse that is supporting to a physician during a medical procedure.
 The next actions of the nurse typically depend on the current actions of the 
physician. Two activities are uncoupled if there is not relationship between them. This 
type of coupling is usually present between people working in different areas; e.g. the 
activities performed by a nurse at the ER are uncoupled from those performed by a 
nurse working in the intensive care unit.  

 

Information-dependence. This characteristic is similar to the location-dependence, but 
it indicates how mandatory is to count on external information to accomplish the activity.
 An information-dependent activity (e.g. the diagnosis of a physical traumatism) 
requires  counting  on  supporting  information  (e.g.  an  X-Ray  image).  Contrarily,  an 
information-independent activity (e.g. the interview to a patient) can be done without 
external  information  support.  Finally,  the  information-supported  activities  (e.g.  the 
prescription of drugs for a flu) use external information if it is available (e.g. the medical 
record indicating the drug allergies of such a patient).  

 

Data input. This variable indicates the level of data input that is required to perform 
the activity. The data input levels can be low (e.g. checking boxes in a form), medium 
(e.g. annotating how to administrate the drugs during a treatment) and high (e.g. writing 
the medical history of a patient). 

Context-Awareness.  This  characteristic  indicates  if  an  activity  is  dependent  of  the 
work context in which it is performed. The possible values that this variable can assume 
 are  context-aware  or  context-independent.  The  first  ones  are  typically  those 
with some level of coupling (i.e. loosely or tightly-coupled) and the second ones are 
those that do not have coupling with other activities.   

 
A mobile work activity can be characterized using combinations of these features. 
If a single value cannot be assigned to these variables, it probably means that multiple 
tasks  with  different  features  are  part  of  the  activity.  In  that  case,  the  activity  being 
analyzed must be decomposed in tasks until a single feature can be assigned to them.  

4.2  Ontology of Mobile Activities Characteristics 

Figure 2 shows an initial ontology of mobile activities characteristics. These characteristics,
 and the relationships among them, can be used by the designers of mobile and 
ubiquitous  applications  to  determine  mandatory  services,  transversal  services  and 
eventual  limitations  of  the  system.  For  instance,  if  the  activity  to  be  supported  is 
loosely or tightly-coupled, the designer will have to consider context-aware services 
and  the  usage  of  external  information  to  support  mobile  workers.  Moreover,  if  that 

 

320 

S.F. Ochoa et al. 

activity requires high  mobility, then the  mobile  worker  will have to use a small device,
 which usually imposes restrictions for data input mechanism (e.g. through virtual 
or physical keyboards). 
 

Fig. 2. Ontology of mobile activities characteristics 

 

Although the designer can identify several system requirements only analyzing this 
ontology,  the  most  important  contribution  of  this  ontology  is  as  instrument  to  help 
designer identifying mandatory supporting services. However, this can be done once 
these services are linked to the characteristics of the activity. Next section exemplifies 
how to match services with activity features. 

4.3  Design Guidelines 

It is well-known that awareness mechanisms are used to support loosely and tightlycoupled 
 activities.  Therefore,  services  implementing  these  mechanisms  are  usually 
required by context-aware applications that support these activity types. Presence and 
location  awareness  services  are  required  to  support  activities  involving  face-to-face 
interactions among mobile workers. Sensing services are required in applications that 
are  context-aware.  Data  transfer  and  synchronization  services  are  mandatory  if  the 
activity  is  information-dependent  or  supported.  Location  awareness  services  are  required 
to support location-dependent activities. If the activity is mobile or nomadic, a 
capturer of the user attention (also known as CUA) should be used before delivering 
information to the worker; thus, the application increases the probability that such a 
person effectively put his attention on it. Clearly, the lack of these services in systems 
supporting activities with these characteristics, will determine the system limitations. 
These  limitations  must  also  be  identified  by  the  designer  before  implementing  the 
solution. 

These are just examples about the type of design inferences that the designer can 
do using the proposed ontology and linking supporting services to activities characteristics.
 Although this is a first step towards the problem solution, this analysis shows 
that addressing it following this approach is highly promising. 

 

 

Understanding the Interaction Support for Mobile Work in an Emergency Room 

321 

5 

Conclusions and Future Work 

Today,  the  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  mobile  activities  can  be  improved  or  enhanced 
using supporting technology. Mobile and ubiquitous applications are typically 
used to reach these goals. As any other collaborative system, the development of these 
applications  is  affected  by  the  iceberg  effect  [1];  therefore  their  software  designers 
have to guess an important part of the supporting services that these applications have 
to provide to the end-users (i.e. the mobile workers). 

Trying to help address such a problem, this article proposes a set of characteristics 
of mobile activities that can be used to help identify many of these services and also 
the  potential  limitations  of  the  new  systems.  These  activity  characteristics  were  obtained 
from a study of the work done by physicians and nurses in an emergency room 
of a hospital. 

Moreover,  we  propose  an  ontology  of  activity  characteristics  and  some  design 
guidelines to ease the services identification process. The ontology specifies the relationships 
among the possible values that can be assumed by the activity characteristics 
(i.e. the context variables). The design guidelines illustrate about how to use the 
ontology to infer the supporting services that will be required by the new application. 
The next step considers determining the services that are mandatory, according to 
the characteristics of the activity to be supported. Moreover, we want to replicate the 
study presented in this paper, probably in the urban emergency responses performed 
by  firefighters, as a  way to extend and validate the proposed activity characteristics 
and also the ontology.  

Acknowledgements.  This  work  has  been  partially  supported  by  Fondecyt  (Chile), 
grant  N°  1120207,  and  European  projects  UbiHealth  (FP7-PEOPLE-2012-IRSES, 
European  Commission,  Grant:  316337)  and  Personal  IADL  Assistant  (PIA) 
Project Number: AAL-2012-5-033.  

References 

1.  Herskovic, V., Ochoa, S.F., Pino, J.A., Neyem,  A.: The Iceberg  Effect: Behind the User 
Interface of Mobile Collaborative Systems. Journal of Universal Computer Science 17(2), 
183–202 (2011) 

2.  Dey,  A.:  Understanding  and  Using  Context.  Personal  and  Ubiq.  Computing 5(1),  4–7 

(2001) 

3.  Rodden, T., Cheverst, K., Davies, N., Dix, A.: Exploiting context in HCI design for mobile 

systems. In: Proc. of the 1st W. on HCI with Mobile Devices, Glasgow, Scotland (1998) 

4.  Abowd,  G.,  Dey,  A.K.,  Orr,  R.,  Brotherton,  J.:  Context-awareness  in  wearable  and  

ubiquitous computing. Virtual Reality 3(3), 200–211 (1998) 

5.  Calvary,  G.,  Coutaz,  J.,  Thevenin,  D.,  Limbourg,  Q.,  Bouillon,  L.,  Vanderdonckt,  J.:  A  
interfaces.  Interacting  with  

Unifying  Reference  Framework  for  multi-target  user 
Computers 15(3), 289–308 (2003) 

6.  Rocchi,  C.,  Stock,  O.,  Zancanaro,  M.,  Kruppa,  M.,  Krüger,  A.:  The  Museum  Visit:  
Generating  Seamless  Personalized  Presentations  on  Multiple  Devices.  In:  Proc.  of  the  
International  Conference  on  Intelligent  User  Interfaces  (IUI  2004),  Funchal,  Portugal,  
pp. 316–318 (2004) 

 

322 

S.F. Ochoa et al. 

7.  Beach, A., Gartrell, M., Xing, X., Han, R., Mishra, S., Seada, K.: Fusing Mobile, Sensor, 
and Social Data To Fully Enable Context-Aware Computing. In: Proc. of the 11th ACM 
Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems and Applications, Annapolis, USA, pp. 61–66 
(2010) 

8.  Hervás, R., Bravo, J., Fontecha, J., Villarreal, V.: Achieving Adaptive Augmented Reality 
through Ontological Context-Awareness applied to AAL Scenarios.  Journal of Universal 
Computer Science 19(9), 1334–1349 (2013) 

9.  Herskovic, V., Neyem, A., Ochoa, S.F., Pino, J.A., Antunes, P.: Understanding Presence 
Awareness  Information  Needs  Among  Engineering  Students.  In: Proc.  of  the  16th  IEEE 
International  Conference  on  Computer  Supported  Cooperative  Work  in  Design,  Wuhan, 
China, May 23-25 (2012) 

10.  Antunes, P., Herskovic, V., Ochoa, S.F., Pino, J.A.: Reviewing the Quality of Awareness 
Support  in  Collaborative  Applications.  Journal  of  Systems  and  Software 89,  146–169 
(2014) 

11.  Romero, P., Calvillo-Gamez, E.H.: Towards an embodied view of flow. In: Proc. of 2nd 
Workshop  on  User  Models  for  Motivational  Systems.  CEUR  Workshop Proc.,  vol. 740, 
pp. 100-105, Girona, Spain (2011) 

12.  Duarte, L., Carriço, L.: The influence of performance-oriented widgets on interactive behavior 
while playing videogames. In: Proc. of the 8th Int. Conf. on Advances in Computer 
Entertainment Technology, Article No. 54, Lisbon, Portugal (2011) 

13.  Garlan,  D.,  Siewiorek,  D.P.,  Smailagic,  A.,  Steenkiste,  P.:  Project  Aura:  Toward  

Distraction-Free Pervasive Computing. Pervasive Computing 1(2), 22–31 (2002) 

14.  Sukthankar,  R.:  Towards  Ambient  Projection  for  Intelligent  Environments.  In:  Proc.  of 

CVIIE 2005, Lexington, USA, pp. 162–172 (2005) 

15.  Breiner, K., Meixner, G., Rombach, D., Seissler, M., Zühlke, D.: Efficient generation of 
ambient intelligent user interfaces. In: König, A., Dengel, A., Hinkelmann, K., Kise, K., 
Howlett, R.J., Jain, L.C. (eds.) KES 2011, Part IV. LNCS, vol. 6884, pp. 136–145. Springer,
 Heidelberg (2011) 

16.  Guerrero,  L.,  Ochoa,  S.F.,  Pino,  J.,  Collazos,  C.:  Selecting  Devices  to  Support  Mobile  

Collaboration. Group Decision and Negotiation 15(3), 243–271 (2006) 

17.  Alarcon, R., Guerrero, L., Ochoa, S.F., Pino, J.: Analysis and Design of Mobile Collaborative 
 Applications  Using  Contextual  Elements.  Computer  and  Informatics 25(6),  469–496 
(2006) 

18.  Tentori,  M.,  Favela,  J.:  Activity-Aware  Computing  for  Healthcare.  IEEE  Pervasive  

Computing 7(2), 51–57 (2008) 

19.  Burgess,  N.:  What  is  it  Like  to  Work  in  an  Emergency  Room?  Hospital  Jobs  Online 

(2014), http://www.hospitaljobsonline.com/career-center/  
healthcare-careers/what-is-it-like-to-work-in-an-emergencyroom.
html (last visit: February 2, 2014) 

20.  Monares,  A.,  Ochoa,  S.,  Herskovic,  V.,  Santos,  R.,  Pino,  J.A.:  Modeling  Interactions  in 
Human-centric Wireless Sensor Networks. In: Proc. of the 2014 IEEE International Conference 
 on  Computer  Supported  Cooperative  Work  in  Design  (CSCWD  2014),  Hsinchu, 
Taiwan (2014) 

21.  Kristoffersen, S., Ljungberg, F.: Mobility: From stationary to mobile work. In: Braa, K., 

Sorensen, C., Dahlbom, B. (eds.) Planet Internet, Lund, Sweden, pp. 137–156 (2000) 

22.  Pinelle, D., Gutwin, C.: A groupware design framework for loosely coupled workgroups. 
In: Proc. of the European Conf. on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, pp. 119–139 
(2005) 

 

