 

Situated Micro-displays for Activity-Aware Systems 

Esunly Medina1, Fahim Kawsar2, Roc Meseguer1, and Sergio F. Ochoa3 

1 Department of Computer Architecture, BarcelonaTech, Barcelona, Spain 

esunly@gmail.com 

2 Bell Laboratories, Alcatel-Lucent, Belgium 

3 Computer Science Department, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile 

Abstract. Most activity-aware systems designed to support mobile workers in 
dynamic environments, such as hospitals or industrial plants, typically consider 
the use of  mobile devices and large displays.  However,  we  envision potential 
benefits of using ubiquitous micro-displays as support of mobile workers activities.
 Particularly, in this paper we show how the use of situated micro-displays, 
as  a  mechanism  for  embedding  information  into  a  physical  environment,  can 
contribute  to  improve  the  performance  and  experience  of  mobile  workers  in 
those scenarios. The article also describes the prototype of a micro-display network 
 designed  to  support  people  performing  spatially  distributed  activities.  It 
also presents a user study that helps understand how the spatial distribution of 
situated micro-displays impacts on the mobile workers performance. 

Keywords: Situated micro-display, activity-centric system, mobile work. 

1 

Introduction 

Advances  in  wireless  communication,  sensor  networks  and  ubiquitous  computing 
have  made  possible  the  interaction  between  people  and  numerous  devices  that  are 
interconnected  and  physically  distributed  in  the  environment  [1].  These  advances 
have promoted the evolution of single-monitor setups towards multi-display environments 
[2], where it is possible to have displays embedded in a physical ambient and 
also  in  everyday  objects.  Several  studies  on  workplaces  have  shown  how  instrumented 
environments and everyday artefacts support people cognition and collaboration 
[3,4]. Researchers have emphasized the need to deliver task-centric information 
in dynamic workplaces, such as hospitals or industrial plants, as a way to support the 
activities performed by mobile workers [5,6]. 

Typically, situated information systems [7] provide information of the physical environment 
to mobile workers, and activity-aware systems [8] infer the workers’ activity 
context in order to offer them suitable supporting services. Most of these systems 
types  rely  on  the  use  of  mobile  devices  and  large  displays  [9].  However,  recent  researches 
[10] advocate for the use of micro-displays to provide situated information in 
activity-aware systems and offer activity-specific guidance. These micro-displays are 
mobile and adaptive. They are distributed across the environment and provide simple 
visual representations of human activities that are linked to physical entities –such as 
objects and people– and integrated in the environment. 

N. Streitz and P. Markopoulos (Eds.): DAPI 2014, LNCS 8530, pp. 450–461, 2014. 
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014 

 

Situated Micro-displays for Activity-Aware Systems 

451 

We envision the potential benefits of using micro-displays to provide instructions 
and activity-centric information to mobile workers in highly dynamic work contexts. 
Consequently, this paper describes a prototype of an activity-aware system based in 
micro-displays. 

As stated in [10], the use of multiple micro-displays raises a number of questions 
regarding  their  spatial  placement  and  distribution.  For  instance,  where  and  how  the 
displays  should  be  deployed  in  a  physical  environment  to  optimize  the  information 
support to mobile workers? In that sense, particular studies are needed to identify the 
trade-off between the quality of the information provided by the micro-displays and 
the  fragmentation  of  users’  attention.  By  increasing  the  number  of  displays  we  can 
show  the  information  in  a  fine-grained  and  situated  fashion.  However,  too  much 
and/or not-so-relevant information demands higher cognition and could lead to information 
overload, jeopardizing its assimilation by the end-users. Therefore, it is critical 
to understand the impact of the distribution granularity and placement alternatives of 
micro-displays to positively impact the effectiveness of activity-aware systems. Trying 
to deal with that issue, this article also reports the results from a user study aimed 
at understanding the impact of spatial placement and distribution of situated and ac-
tivity-aware micro-displays, on the users’ awareness and attention. Our results show 
that adding situated micro-displays to support the participants' activities enhances user 
experience and do not causes information overload. Both, quantitative and qualitatively 
results clearly show the benefits of introducing situated micro-displays. By increasing 
the density of micro-displays in an area, the performance of individuals improves 
and they also get favourable impressions after the activity completion.  

Next section describes the prototype of a micro-display network. Section 3 presents 
the user study and section 4 discusses the obtained results. Section 5 presents several 
design guidelines obtained from the user study. Section 6 presents the conclusions and 
future work. 

2 

Activity-Aware Micro-displays Prototype 

A  micro-display  in  an  activity-aware  system  provides  activity-specific  guidance  to 
mobile  workers  according  to  the  design  guidelines  proposed  in  [10].  A  network  of 
these  micro-displays enables  the presentation of contextual cues at critical places to 
aid human activities that are  spatially dispersed. These contextual cues describe the 
necessity or possibility for action in a given location and involving a specific object. 
They also show the result or execution state of preceding actions, and present a possible 
next action. More specifically, the representations of these contextual cues have 
different  properties  according  to  generic  activity  patterns  that  define  particular  routines 
at structured workplaces. These properties are the following: 
•  Colour: Used to represent the relationship between a given entity (people or ob-

ject) and the current activity.  

•  Identity: Represented by a number. We also use a circle to indicate that a given 

entity is present and active. 

•  Textual description: Provides an explanation about something; e.g. an instruction. 

 

452 

E. Medina et al. 

Accordingly, Fig. 1 shows examples of visual representations displayed in the mi-
cro-displays  to  the  participants  of  our  study.  Fig.  1  (a)  shows  a  representation  that 
provides  an  overview  of  the  activity  that  participants  had  to  complete.  Fig.  1  (b) 
shows information about an object related to such an activity. 

Textual description:  
explanation of the action

Circle indicating that 
the object is active

Identity:  

activity number identiﬁer

Colour:  
relationship 

between the object 

and the activity

(a) Activity-marker design

(b) Object-marker design

 

Fig. 1. Design of the visual representations of activities 

In our prototype activity-aware system, we have used shielded mobile devices of 
varying size as the placeholders (i.e., micro display) of these visual representations. In 
Fig. 2b, and Fig. 2c, two different form  factors of  micro-displays are shown,  where 
the former is used to present object-specific information pertaining to a task at hand, 
and the latter is used to provide an overview of the activity in context. Each of these 
displays  runs  a  tiny  client  application  (Ajax-Comet)  that  shows  this  activity-related 
information,  and  all  of  the  displays  are  connected  to  a  central  display  server  in  a 
RESTful  way  following  multitenancy  principles.  The  activity  information  shown  in 
the micro-displays is stored in the central display server, which pushes the appropriate 
information to a specific micro-display in a contextual fashion. Although we did not 
implement  actual  context  recognition  in  our  prototype,  this  pushing  mechanism 
enabled us to dynamically display and update the information in the  micro-displays 
appropriately.  For  instance,  when  a  participant  arrives  to  the  main  entrance  of  the 
room where the activity is taking place, a micro-display located at the entrance automatically 
provides him an overview of the whole activity. 

The micro-displays network was implemented connecting several computing devices 
through Wi-Fi, using an Apple's Airport Express base station; particularly a MacBook 
laptop  was  used  to  run  the  server  and  allowed  us  to  manage  the  control  panel  of  the 
system (Fig. 2a); nine iPods touch that represent the regular micro-displays that provide 
object-related information and one Apple’s iPad that emulates the main micro-display 
that shows the activity overview. We covered part of these devices screen  with black 
acrylic plastic in order to create the effect of having displays with small size screens (see 
Fig. 2b and 2c). The iPad’s micro-display had a screen size of 7 x 7 cm (i.e. the acrylic 
plastic window), whereas the iPods had a window of 3 x 3 cm. 

(a) Display control panel

(b) Micro-display prototype

(c) Micro-display in operation

 

Fig. 2. Micro-display network prototype 

 

 

3 

User Study 

Situated Micro-displays for Activity-Aware Systems 

453 

This  section  introduces  the  user  study  performed  to  explore  the  spatial  distribution 
aspect  of  situated  micro-displays  and  its  impact  in  users’  satisfaction,  attention  and 
performance.  Particularly  we  want  to  understand  whether  and  under  what  circumstances 
the use of situated micro-displays is useful to support human activities.  

The user study involved mobile workers that had to complete a given activity using 
the information displayed in the micro-displays. We varied the distribution and density 
of micro-displays presented to the participants, generating thus different work conditions.
  The  placement  of  situated  micro-displays  followed  the  guidelines  given  in 
[10], and the study involved three experimental scenarios. The first scenario considers 
that mobile workers only have one micro-display (activity-marker) located in an ac-
tivity-centric fashion (i.e. the device is located at the main area where the activity is 
taking place) and it shows information about the activity as a whole. The second and 
third scenarios represent the  space-centric and the  entity-centric distribution respectively.
  The  space-centric  distribution  considers  micro-displays  placed  in  a  space 
shared  by  multiple  entities  (people  or  objects)  and  the  entity-centric  distribution  involves 
a micro-display embedded in every entity.  

For these last two scenarios, additionally to the activity-marker, we also had 3 and 
9  extra  micro-displays  used  as  object-markers  respectively.  These  object-markers 
show information about the objects involved in the main activity. In the second scenario,
 we placed 3 micro-displays at different locations of the physical space where the 
several objects involved in the activity had been placed. For the latter scenario, due to 
the study' activities entail interactions with 9 different objects, we placed the microdisplays 
very close to these objects location. We decided to use this number of microdisplays 
 due  to  hardware  restrictions  –wireless  connectivity–  and  also  to  make  the 
study conveniently manageable and not tiring for the participants. Summarizing, the 
three experimentation scenarios involved 1, 4 and 10 micro-displays respectively. 

Physical Setup. The space were the study took place was a conference room of 20.4 
m2 approximately. Fig. 3 shows, on a blueprint of the area, the physical setup used in 
the third scenario. In this case the distance between micro-displays was about 1.5 m. 
It is important to notice that across the different study settings, the spatial distribution 
of  the  micro-displays  in  the  room  was  maintained,  independently  of  the  number  of 
devices. Particularly, the maximum distance (in metres) between the farthest pair of 
micro-displays was the same for all scenarios. Thus, we intend to assure that the different 
scenarios settings do not determine or affect the results of this study. 

The  activity  took  place  mainly  on  a  tall  table  placed  at  the  main  entrance  of  the 
room.  There  we  placed  the  main  micro-display  with  the  activity  overview  (to 
represent  the  activity-centric  placement  of  situated  micro-displays).  We  also  placed 
across  the  room  the  different  objects  involved  in  the  study  activities.  Other  objects 
and activities were intentionally introduced in the room to simulate a scenario where 
the  same  physical  space  can  be  shared  between  several  activities  and  entities.  The 
walls of the room were partially covered with Velcro material to be able to place and 
remove the micro-displays when needed, according to the study scenario.  

 

454 

E. Medina et al. 

Fig. 3. Floor Plan showing the physical setup 

 

Tasks.  The  activities  that  participants  had  to  complete  involved  a  number  of  simulated 
 simple  tasks.  Little  information  processing  was  required  to  understand  the  information 
displayed and to carry out a single task. We decided to use simulated tasks 
instead of real-world work activities due to our research is a proof-of-concept focused 
on the  use of  micro-displays  to build  situated  information system to support  mobile 
workers, independently of the specific domain where it is applied. According to [7], 
these kinds of systems are based in the situational theory of action, which states that a 
goal-oriented activity can be done through the minimally reflective and fluid actions 
performed  by  skilled  workers  engaged  in  routine  tasks.  However,  we  have  added 
some complexity to the activity as a whole due to the fact that the information about 
many  operational  tasks  was  displayed  at  the  same  time.  Specifically,  the  activities 
were several puzzles that the participants had to solve using the information shown in 
the micro-displays. In order to do that, they had to pick up the correct objects –among 
the objects distributed around the room– and place them in the correct positions on a 
grid. The tasks selected for this study have the following properties:  

1. Physical:  The  tasks  involve  physical  movement  and  involve  tangible  interaction 

with objects. 

2. Spatially  distributed:  Participants  have  to  move  from  one  place  to  another  to  

complete the tasks. 

3. Goal oriented: Tasks have a common final goal.  
4. Non-sequential: The interdependency among tasks is minimal. 

Accordingly, we selected this particular puzzle activity from the nine categories for 
manual  tasks  referenced  in  [11],  however  we  normalized  it  to  assess  the  quality  of 
non-sequentially and spatial distribution of situated micro-displays. The independent 
variable of the study is the number of micro-displays. For this reason, each participant 
was always exposed to the same activity, but we varied the distribution granularity of 
the micro-displays between the different study scenarios. By doing so, we maintained 
the  complexity  level  of  the  tasks  that  the  participants  have  to  perform,  so  that  the 
activity itself does not influence the study results. In order to avoid learning effects 
that can lead to the improvement in the users’ performance, for each study scenario 
we  altered  the  pattern  of  the  activity  and  the  objects  involved  on  it,  as  a  way  to  
make  that  the  activity  looked  like  a  completely  different  one.  Accordingly,  each  
study  scenario  had  a  different  activity  pattern,  as  well  as  a  specific  number  of  
micro-displays. 

 

 

Situated Micro-displays for Activity-Aware Systems 

455 

Participants. The participants in this study were 14 students from Lancaster University.
 We did not involve participants with a particular profile or groups with special 
characteristics,  because  the  study  was  not  intended  for  a  specific  domain.  Prior  to 
perform the study, we asked participants to provide demographic data. There were 9 
male  and  5  female,  aged  21  to  27 (average  of  24.3). The  study  took  approximately 
one and a half hour per participant.  

Method. Participants took part in the experiment individually. They began the study 
being  told  about  the  study  purpose  and  with  a  brief  training  session.  We  used  A/V 
equipment to record the experiments and the people interviews for later analysis. The 
study followed a within-subjects design, where each participant experienced the three 
study scenarios. In addition, we used a Balanced Latin Square for counterbalancing to 
mitigate potential learning effects. We ensured that two participants completed each 
row in the Latin Square. The scenarios entailed the completion of 3 different activity 
patterns composed by 9 tasks each, which corresponds to the number of objects the 
users had to interact with to complete the activity. Following the completion of each 
study scenario, we asked each participant to answer several subjective questions taken 
from  the  IBM  Computer  Usability  Satisfaction  Questionnaires  [12]  and  the  NASA 
Task Load Index [13]. We also asked them additional questions for further evaluation 
of divided attention and information overload issues. In addition, after the whole experimentation 
 process,  each  participant  answered  the  questions  of  a  final  semistructured 
interview aimed at gathering additional feedback about the best distribution 
arrangement of micro-displays.  

4 

Study Result 

In this section, we discuss the result of the study from four perspectives: Task performance,
 multitasking effect, context switch and participant’ behaviour. 

4.1  Completion Time and Errors 

 In  [14]  the  author  presents  the  use  of  the  reaction  time  to  measure  the  division  of 
attention and also the accuracy and speed of an action as a measure of the spare cognitive 
capacity.  Accordingly,  we  use completion time and  errors to measure the appearance 
of divided attention and information overload respectively. 

We computed the activity’s completion time as the time elapsed from the moment 
the participants first looked at the main micro-display and the moment just after they 
placed the last piece of the puzzle in the right position.  Results show that a higher 
number of micro-displays can help decrease the activities’ completion time. We obtained 
an average difference of 8.67 seconds (7.9%) between the fastest and the slowest 
performance (considering the three scenarios). The difference in the maximum and 
minimum completion times was 11 and 28 seconds respectively.  

Errors were classified into two types: completion and location errors. Completion 
errors are those occurred during the completion of the puzzle, e.g. placing a  wrong 
object  in  the  grid,  having  some  missing,  etc.  The  number  of  these  errors  was  very 

 

456 

E. Medina et al. 

small  and  we  did  not  observe  a  direct  correlation  between  the  number  of  microdisplays 
and this kind of error. However, the completion errors for the scenario with 
the  highest  number  of  micro-displays  were  50%  smaller  than  those  with  the  lowest 
number of micro-displays. Location errors were counted when the participant picked 
the wrong objects from the different room locations. Location errors are a good metric 
of performance and efficiency, especially when the tasks are physically dispersed.  

 

Fig. 4. Location errors 

A  high  number  of  location  errors  imply  that  the  individuals  have  to  walk  longer 
distances to complete the activity, and as a result, the effort and time required is higher.
 Fig 4 shows that the mean and maximum values of the location errors have a negative 
correlation with the number of micro-displays. The experiments in the first study 
scenario had a significantly higher average error rate (57.1%) than in the third one. 

4.2 

Simultaneous Tasks and Iteration Steps  

The participants' performance shows a direct relationship between their overall satisfaction 
when completing the activity and the number of simultaneous physical tasks 
they engaged with. Participants’ satisfaction also has a negative correlation with the 
number of iteration steps that they had to perform for completing the activity. For this 
reason, we have included this metric to try understanding the information overload on 
the mobile workers. 

We computed the number of simultaneous tasks performed by participants, counting 
the maximum number of objects that they picked in the routes followed for completing 
the  activity.  We  defined  the  iteration  steps  as  the  number  of  stages  that  participants 
needed for completing the activity, e.g., the number of rounds around the room. 

Fig. 5 (a) shows the number of simultaneous tasks (minimum, maximum and aver-
age) performed by the participants. These results indicate a direct correlation between 
the average values of this variable and the micro-displays density. When we have nine 
object-related  micro-displays,  the  number  of  simultaneous  tasks  is  (in  average) 
43.3%, which is higher than when we only have the main micro-display (scenario 1).  
Fig. 5 (b) shows the results of the iteration steps for the three study scenarios. The 
results  show  a  negative  correlation  between  the  number  of  micro-displays  and  the 
number of iteration steps required for the activities completion. There is a difference 
of  33.3%  between  the  average  values  obtained  in  first  and  the  last  study  scenario  
respectively. The same tendency in followed by the maximum and minimum values.  

 

 

Situated Micro-displays for Activity-Aware Systems 

457 

(a)

(b)

 

Fig. 5. (a) Simultaneous tasks and (b) iteration steps 

4.3  Context Switches 

A context switch happens when the users’ view switches from the main activity mi-
cro-display to any other point. Accordingly, we computed the number of eye movements 
of the participants. The results indicate that mobile workers in the study scenario 
with the smallest number of micro-displays required a higher number of switches 
to  accomplish  the  tasks  (Fig.  6).  The  average  context  switches  in  the  first  scenario 
were 32.5% higher than in the third scenario. The maximum and minimum values of 
context switches adhere to this tendency. 

Fig. 6. Context switches 

 

It  seems  reasonable  to  think  that  entity-centric  micro-displays  introduce  maximum 
fragmentation  of  attention  in  comparison  to  activity-centric  placement  because  the 
information is dispersed across a higher number of  micro-displays,  which could demand 
more context switches. However, these results confirm that a higher density of 
micro-displays  actually  reduces  the  context  switching,  because  the  information  is 
presented in a more situated fashion. Therefore, we cannot claim that having a higher 
number of micro-displays increases the fragmentation of attention 

4.4 

Participants’ Behaviour 

Another  interesting  observation  about  the  participants’  behaviour  while  completing 
the activities is related to the physical path that they followed. We observed that there 
was an important difference in the  number and  shape of the routes that participants 

 

458 

E. Medina et al. 

followed for collecting the objects around the room. Fig. 7 depicts two examples of 
the participants’ movement pattern around the room.  

 

Fig. 7. Examples of the participants’ physical movement pattern 

 

Fig. 7 (a) shows a sample result for the scenario with only the main micro-display 
and  Fig.  7  (b)  shows  the  result  when  the  participants  also  had  9  additional  objectrelated 
 micro-displays.  Analysing  these  paths  we  can  confirm  the  participants’  impressions 
that a higher physical effort was needed when the number of micro-displays 
was small. We can also claim that increasing the number of micro-displays results in a 
more efficient use of the physical space.   

5 

Implications: Design Insights 

Next we summarize some design insights drawn from the results of our study. These 
insights allow designers to make informed decisions when developing activity-aware 
systems. 

Increasing  the  density  of  micro-displays  improves  the  activity  performance  and 
information  support.  The  results  indicate  that  the  entity-centric  distribution  of  the 
micro-displays  helps boost user experience and has a positive impact in the activity 
performance  and  the  quality  of  the  information  support.  Both,  quantitative  and  
qualitative data showed that activity performance increases with the number of microdisplays.
 Measurements of completion time, location errors, iteration steps and number 
of simultaneous activities confirmed that the best performance is achieved when 
we have as many micro-displays as objects has the activity. In addition, the partici-
pants’ feedback reveals that most participants preferred to have a high density of mi-
cro-displays,  because  the  information  provided  by  them  becomes  clear  and  easy  to 
find. This would indicate that the quality of the supporting information increases with 
the micro-displays granularity.  

Situated micro-displays require focused attention. During the interviews, the participants 
mentioned that they looked at the micro-displays one at a time. Therefore, although 
 we  initially  expected  that  situated  micro-displays  with  an  entity-centric 
placement  would  require  divided  attention,  we  found  that  instead  they  required  focused 
 attention.  Previous  researchers  have  found  that  the  performance  of  a  mobile 

 

 

Situated Micro-displays for Activity-Aware Systems 

459 

worker correlates positively with the amount of information that he receives; however,
 if the information provided is too much, his performance rapidly decline [15]. For 
this  reason,  we  hypothesized  that  increasing  the  number  of  situated  micro-display 
would improve activity performance, but up to certain point due to the fragmentation 
of the users’ attention. Nevertheless, our findings revealed that micro-displays require 
focused  attention  and  a  higher  density  of  them  help  reduce  the  context  switching, 
because the information is presented in a more situated fashion. The fastest completion 
times obtained during the experiments confirm this finding. We cannot unequivocally 
assert the claim due to the limited number of participants and micro-displays 
involved in the experiments. Therefore, it would be necessary to perform more longitudinal 
studies in order to confirm statistically these observations. 

Spatial distribution does not affect the information capacity. According to the quantitative 
results and the participants’ feedback, it seems that the spatial distribution of 
the  information  does  not  cause  information  overload.  In  contrast,  the  results  confirmed 
that the quality of the provided information and the users’ satisfaction increases 
with the density of micro-displays. Therefore, we can claim that an entity-centric 
placement  of  situated  micro-displays,  when  the  entities  and  task  involved  in  the  
activity are spatially dispersed, does not affect the mobile workers’ capacity to successfully 
 process  the  information.  In  fact,  we  used  some  metrics  and  indicators  of 
information overload, such as recall and emergent and implicit poles [16], by asking 
participants some specific questions after finishing the activity. These results did not 
show signs of information overload in any of the study scenarios. 

Situated  micro-displays  can  be  used  for  structured  activity  route.  As  already  expected 
and confirmed by the study, there are applications that could benefit of using 
situated  micro-displays  distributed  in  an  entity-centric  fashion;  for  instance,  those 
involving a structured activity route. That is, we can deploy the micro-displays in the 
work area in a way that the user is led to follow a specific path to complete the activity.
 If the micro-displays are placed one after another in a structured fashion, there is a 
high possibility that people follow a controlled activity route. An additional benefit is 
that if the deployment of the micro-displays is carefully planned, we could use more 
efficiently the physical space. 

6 

Design Guidelines 

The presented results allow us to provide several design guidelines, which can support 
the design of mobile and ubiquitous solutions to display activity-centric information 
into  situated  micro-displays.  It  is  important  to  follow  a  user  centric  approach  when 
deploying a situated micro-display network that supports mobile workers performing 
spatially  distributed  tasks.  Thus,  the  designer  improves  the  chances  that  the  system 
implementation fits with the current practices at the specific workplace.  

Entity-centric distribution. Entity-centric placement of situated micro-displays seems 
to be the best alternative to guide spatially distributed tasks. Therefore, micro-displays 

 

460 

E. Medina et al. 

should be fully integrated in the work environment and linked to the physical entities 
that are relevant for the workplace activities. 

Micro-display density. The scenario with highest density of micro-displays provided 
the most effective, enjoyable and effortless support for mobile workers. This finding 
was also perceived by the participants. Therefore, we recommend embedding as much 
micro-displays as possible in tools and entities used by mobile workers. 

Trade-off  between  structured  deployment  of  micro-displays  and  users’  autonomy. 
We can use situated micro-displays to determine the physical movement patterns of 
the mobile worker at the workplace. Taking away part of the activity’s control from 
the worker, it is possible to make a more effective use of the physical space and reduce 
the effort required for the activity completion. However, we cannot ensure that it 
would  improve  workers’  efficiency.  Therefore,  the  deployment  of  micro-displays 
should reach a delicate balance between regulating the work practices and preserving 
the autonomy and decision-making capacity of skilful workers. 

Context-based customisation. It is important to consider the work context in the deployment 
of micro-displays. This work context should consider the current work activities 
 and  the  environment  in  which  they  will  be  performed.  Therefore,  some  factors 
such as screen size, visual design and the kind and amount of information to be provided 
by the micro-displays should be adapted accordingly. 

7 

Conclusions and Future Work 

The use of situated micro-displays is an evident design alternative to present real-time 
in-situ information to support complex, dynamic and spatially distributed human activities.
 In this paper we provided a proof-of-concept towards this goal, by developing 
a prototype of a micro-display network and performing a user study that explores the 
users'  experiences  according  to  spatial  distribution  of  situated  micro-displays.  We 
described  the  prototype  solution,  and  also  analysed  the  effect  that  the  distribution 
granularity of micro-displays has on the users' performance. The results provide clear 
evidence  of  the  advantages  of  having  a  high  situated  micro-displays  density  in  the 
workplace.  Some  of  these  advantages  are  the  improvement  in  activity  completion 
time, the reduction of the errors, the improvement of the efficiency in the use of the 
physical space and a higher user satisfaction. 

The results also indicate that the use of micro-displays to support spatially distributed 
fluid tasks, which are part of a complex and dynamic activity, can boost user 
experience and have a positive impact in the people performance. The results of the 
user  study  also  helped  us  to  gain  further  insights  about  the  design  implications  of 
performing activities in environments with a high micro-displays density.  

These results allowed us to provide some design guidelines that help designers of 
mobile and ubiquitous solutions to deal with the modelling of activity-centric information 
that will be deployed through situated micro-displays. The next steps consider 
performing  a  transversal  study  to  determine  the  generalizability  of  the  current  
findings. We also plan to perform a field study in real workplaces. 

 

 

Situated Micro-displays for Activity-Aware Systems 

461 

References 

1.  Feki, M.A., Kawsar, F., Boussard, M., Trappeniers, L.: The Internet of Things: The next 

technological revolution. IEEE Computer 46(2), 24–25 (2013) 

2.  Berkhoff,  C.,  et  al.:  Clairvoyance:  A  framework  to  integrate  shared  displays  and  mobile 

computing devices. Future Generation Computer Systems (2013) 

3.  Hutchins, E.: Cognition in the Wild, vol. 262082314. MIT Press, Cambridge (1995) 
4.  Poslad, S.: Ubiquitous Computing: Smart Devices, Environments and Interactions (2009) 
5.  Heyer, C.: Investigations of ubicomp in the oil and gas industry. In: Ubicomp, pp. 61–64. 

ACM (2010) 

6.  Bardram, J.E.: A novel approach for creating activity-aware applications in a hospital environment.
 In: Gross, T., Gulliksen, J., Kotzé, P., Oestreicher, L., Palanque, P., Prates, R.O., 
Winckler,  M.  (eds.)  INTERACT  2009.  LNCS,  vol. 5727,  pp.  731–744.  Springer,  
Heidelberg (2009) 

7.  Waller, V.: Information systems in the wild: Supporting activity in the world. Behaviour & 

Information Technology 28(6), 577–588 (2009) 

8.  Tentori,  M.,  Favela,  J.:  Activity-aware  computing  in  mobile  collaborative  working  environments.
  In:  Haake,  J.M.,  Ochoa,  S.F.,  Cechich,  A.  (eds.)  CRIWG  2007.  LNCS, 
vol. 4715, pp. 337–353. Springer, Heidelberg (2007) 

9.  Scott,  S.D.,  Sasangohar,  F.,  Cummings,  M.:  Investigating  supervisory-level  activity 

awareness displays for command and control operations. In: HSIS (2009) 

10.  Kawsar, F., Vermeulen, J., Smith, K., Luyten, K., Kortuem, G.: Exploring the design space 
for situated glyphs to support dynamic work environments. In: Lyons, K., Hightower, J., 
Huang,  E.M.  (eds.)  Pervasive  2011.  LNCS,  vol. 6696,  pp.  70–78.  Springer,  Heidelberg 
(2011) 

11.  Rosenthal,  S.,  et  al.:  Augmenting  on-screen  instructions  with  micro-projected  guides: 

When it works, and when it fails. In: Ubicomp, pp. 203–212. ACM (2010) 

12.  Lewis, J.R.: IBM computer usability satisfaction questionnaires: Psychometric evaluation 

and instructions for use. Int. J. of Human-Computer Interaction 7(1), 57–78 (1995) 

13.  Hart,  S.G.,  et  al.:  Development  of  NASA-TLX:  Results  of  empirical  and  theoretical  
research.  In:  Human  Mental  Workload.  Advances  in  Psychology,  vol. 52,  pp.  139–183 
(1988) 

14.  Kahneman, D.: Attention and Effort. Prentice-Hall Inc., Englewood Cliffs (1973) 
15.  Eppler, M.J., Mengis, J.: The concept of information overload: A review of literature from 
organization science, accounting, marketing, MIS, and related disciplines. The Information 
Society 20(5), 325–344 (2004) 

16.  Müller,  J.,  Wilmsmann,  D.,  Exeler,  J.,  Buzeck,  M.,  Schmidt,  A.,  Jay,  T.,  Krüger,  A.:  
Display  blindness:  The  effect  of  expectations  on  attention  towards  digital  signage.  In:  
Tokuda, H., Beigl, M., Friday, A., Brush, A.J.B., Tobe, Y. (eds.) Pervasive 2009. LNCS, 
vol. 5538, pp. 1–8. Springer, Heidelberg (2009) 

 

 

