 

Digital Workbook: A Mobile Learning Environment to 

Support Collaborative Examinations 

Iván D. Claros, César1 A. Collazos1, Luis A. Guerrero2, and Sergio F. Ochoa2 

1 IDIS Research Group, Universidad del Cauca, Colombia 

{iclaros,ccollazo}@unicauca.edu.co 

2 Computer Science Department, Universidad de Chile, Chile 

{luguerre,sochoa}@dcc.uchile.cl 

Abstract. It is already known that some collaborative assessment processes can 
provide  students  not  only  the  possibility  to  show  how  well  they  have  understood 
knowledge content, but also the opportunity to enhance and increase such 
knowledge. Such learning activities also allow instructors to diagnose the quality 
 of  the  instructional  process.  However  there  is  evidence  that  this  type  of  
activities  involve  an  important  effort.  This  article  presents  a  mobile  learning 
environment named digital workbook, which was designed to support students 
and  instructors  when  applying  a  Collaborative  Examination  Technique.  The 
tool  was  evaluated  in  a  Computer  Science  undergraduate  course,  and  the  obtained 
results are highly encouraging.  

Keywords: collaborative assessment process, mobile computing. 

1   Introduction 

From a collaboration point of view, sharing information is one of the most important 
activities in teaching-learning scenarios. Most of the time students share information 
without using exchange structures or adequate supporting tools. In that sense, collaborative 
learning techniques provide strategies to support the student learning process by 
doing some activities more than simply watching and listening. However, collaborative 
 learning  activities  are  still  difficult  to  design  and  apply  inside  the  classroom; 
especially if those activities include new technological elements. In that way, we are 
interested in the development of technological solutions to be integrated in an educative 
setting supporting social interactions among different group members. The solutions 
will allow students to achieve the pedagogical goals in an effective manner, by 
acquiring  abilities  like  problem  solving,  critical  thinking,  meta-cognitive  thinking 
(learning to learn), and information retention, as it was proposed by Johnson & Johnson 
[1]. Some years ago the authors proposed a Collaborative Evaluation Technique 
(CET) [2], which involves three stages composing a collaborative examination proc-
ess:  a  pre-test,  a  test  and  a  post-test.  The  pre-test  main  goal  is  to  help  students  to  
understand and assimilate, in an early stage, the knowledge that is going to be considered 
in the test phase. The test phase involves the individual resolution of an exam, 
similar to a traditional examination process,  which is face-to-face and hand-written. 
Finally, the post-test intends to reach two main goals: (1) that students find the right 

G. Kolfschoten, T. Herrmann, and S. Lukosch (Eds.): CRIWG 2010, LNCS 6257, pp. 345–352, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 

346 

I.D. Claros et al. 

answers  to  the  test  questions/items  through  a  discussion  among  them,  and  (2)  that 
students identify the right points and the mistakes in their answers. At the end, in an 
individual manner, each student grades his/her own exam and give it back to the instructor.
 For the correction of their own exams, the students use the solution outline 
constructed by the group during the discussion session. Finally, students grade their 
own exam as a whole, in accordance with the individual grades assigned to each answer 
of the test. The students’ answers are then examined and graded by the instructor 
or the teaching assistant. Students that find the right answers during the post-test receive 
a bonus in their exam final score. 

On this context, the authors propose to use a collaborative software tool to support 
some  activities  involved  in  the  CET.  It  will  help  to  reduce  the  effort  involved  in  
performing the CET process. Such tool has been named the Digital Workbook. This 
solution keeps the traditional paper notebook metaphor in order to allow students to 
express their ideas and annotations in a natural way. The digital workbook also offers 
to  the  users  several  interaction  mechanisms  among  group  members,  which  can  be 
used to support collaborative activities. In that way, students can build in a collaborative 
 manner,  their  responses  to  the  problems  proposed  in  the  pre-test  and  post-test 
stages by using services of the digital workbook, e.g. the creation of work sheets they 
can  share,  annotate  and  publish.  Mechanisms  such  as  annotations  or  publications 
convey communication elements in synchronous and asynchronous way.  

A  particular  module  of  this  tool,  which  was  named  CETProfessor,  was  implemented 
to support the instructor during the activity preparation and monitoring processes.
 This module includes several services, e.g.: (1) a list of questions that can be 
reused during tests, (2) services to configure access grants for the accounts of  users 
participating in the activity, and (3) various communication services that are useful to 
publish the questions and responses involved in the activity. Some of these services 
include: a sociogram, participation records, and registered users list and on-line. 

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: next section presents background information 
related to the development of the proposed collaborative tool. In section 3 
describes the architecture of the digital workbook and its main components. Section 4 
presents  the  experimentation  process  performed  to  evaluate  this  tool,  and  also  the 
preliminary results. Finally, section 5 presents the conclusions and further work. 

2   Background 

It  is  important  to  mention  that  CET  already  counts  on  a  collaborative  system  that 
automates  several  of  its  activities.  The  tool,  named  MOCET [6]  runs  on  tablet  PCs 
and  PDAs,  and  utilizes  a  stylus  to  keep  the  metaphor  of  the  paper  notebook.  This 
system allows each student to share information just with the instructor. For example, 
a student can retrieve or submit his/her exam using this service. Data persistency and 
synchronization are managed by a platform named SOMU (Service-Oriented Mobile 
Units) [3]. 

Shared objects, e.g. images, text documents or exams, can be accessed on-demand 
by members of a mobile work session. These persons communicate among them using 
a mobile ad-hoc network [7], which forms a distributed system. During pre-test, 
each student can share his/her resources with other students; however during the test 

 

 

Digital Workbook: A Mobile Learning Environment 

347 

and post-test students can interact just with the instructor. In every stage these persons 
can do annotations on their private or public resources. If the stage allows them, two 
or more students can exchange or combine their annotations in order to get a consolidated 
 view  of  their  comments.  MOCET  separates  the  object  from  the  annotations 
done over them. It simplifies the implementation of several services, such as the annotation 
exchange and synchronization, and also the replication of shared objects. 

This tool uses an application programming interface provided by Microsoft OneNote 
 [1],  to  access  services  for  hand-writing  on  tablet  PCs  and  handheld  devices. 
Although  these  services  are  useful,  every  device  running  MOCET  must  include  the 
product OneNote as a supporting service. It limits the possibility to reuse the tool in 
more than one scenario. In addition, MOCET have shown some usability limitations 
mainly  in  the  module  that  allow  instructor  to  prepare  and  monitor  a  CET  activity. 
These reasons motivated to the authors to develop a completely new system that solve 
the already mentioned MOCET limitations. The result was the Digital Workbook. 

3   Digital Workbook  

The digital workbook was also designed to be used on a Tablet PC; however it does 
not  require  any  plug-in  or  software  product  to  provide  the  services  to  students  and 
instructors. The tool implements a public and a private space to manage the resources 
in each computing device. It also implements two communication services: ICET and 
IPageShare. ICET represents the design contract between CETProfesor (module used 
by  the  instructor)  and  digital  workbook  (module  used  by  the  students)  in  order  to 
obtain  information  about  proposed  questions  and  group  information.  IPageShare  allows 
sharing pages between digital workbooks.  

 

Such  service  is  executed 
in  an  autonomous  way,  and 
allows  students  to  perform 
distributed  presentation  or 
share 
(e.g. 
pages  of  the  workbook)  as 
part of a private session. Fig. 
1  depicts  a  general  diagram 
that  allows  understand  how 
the workbook works.  

information 

 

Fig. 1. General Diagram of the architecture in the communication 
level 

The  module  CETProfessor 
 manages  a  database  of 
questions  and  users.  This  information  and  also  the  exams  can  be  shared  with  the  
students using the ICET communication service. Each digital workbook manages its 
own  pages  (or  working  sheets)  that  could  be  published  or  shared  according  to  the 
participants needs. 

3.1   Digital User Interface 

Figure 2 presents a screenshot of the digital workbook main user interface. The interface 
involves five components or interface areas:  

 

348 

I.D. Claros et al. 

(A)  A  list  of  questions  given  by  CETProfessor.  Each  question  has  its  own  responses,
 describing the communication process. 

(B)  A list of users that are part of the work group. It uses green color for the connected 
users and white for the disconnected ones. 

(C)  A working area. There it is possible to add lines and some graphical components 
like geometric figures, images and text. Notes or annotations are a special 
type of components allowing students to make some comments about the 
content  of  certain  task.  Based  on  these  annotations  a  sociogram  is  displayed 
about the interaction of the students. 

(D)  A menu bar with different components could be integrated and also the communication 
 services  that  allow  sharing  page,  working  sheets  or  students’  options 
that can be sent to the instructor. 

(E)  An information line that allows accessing to the awareness management tool, 
which  was  proposed  in  [5].  In  order  to  obtain  awareness  independence,  the 
digital workbook and CETProfessor modules implement their own awareness 
mechanisms. This aspect is going to be evaluated in future experimentations. 

Fig. 2. General View of the Digital Workbook (in Spanish) 

 

3.2   CETProfessor 

This module is used just by instructors and it allows: 1) managing the list of questions 
and users; 2) executing communication services that allow users access shared information,
 and publish students’ contributions through pages or working sheets; and 3) 
facilitating tutor mechanisms to monitor a CET activity.  

Fig.3 presents a screenshot of the CETProfessor user interface. In N) we can observe 
an example of how different users have made some comments to the working 
sheets of the teammates. In B) it is possible to observe the list of users registered per 
activity, their connection states and the different responses published in every working 
sheet. If the user clicks a question in L), the module displays the responses. In M) 
we can observe the buttons to access the edition window, the questions and the commands 
to launch and stop the ICET service. 

 

 

 

Digital Workbook: A Mobile Learning Environment 

349 

Fig. 3. General view of CETProfessor 

 

The CETProfessor  module does not include  functionality  to edit the responses in 
the students working sheets. If the instructor wants intervene, s/he must send a message 
 to  the  students.  In  future  versions  we  hope  to  include  mechanisms  that  allow 
tutor to intervene in a direct manner over the responses working sheets. Next we describe 
the experimentation process performed to evaluate this tool. 

4   Experimentation 

During  the  experimentation  phase  we  worked  with  students  of  a  Human-Computer 
Interaction course in the Computer Science Program at University A (Colombia). The 
topic evaluated was user interfaces in collaborative systems; particularly: awareness 
mechanisms in CSCW environments, usability and tangible interfaces. A set of questions 
 were  formulated  to  support  the  learning  of  these  topics.  We  worked  with  21 
students divided into working groups composed of three randomly selected students. 
Due to lack of Tablet PCs only two of these groups worked with the digital workbook 
(ULD), and the other ones (UT) without digital workbooks. In this experiment three 
tabletPC  were  used,  the  ULD  groups  had  to  interchange  the  tabletPCs  during  the 
activities.  In  one  of  these  tabletPC,  both  Digital  Workbook  and  CETProfesor  were 
executed, in the others, only the Digital Workbook was executed.  

4.1   Methodology 

The  process  began  with  an  introductory  talk  about  the  topic,  where  concepts  like 
collaborative  work  and  collaborative  learning  were  explained.  The  working  groups 
were organized and every student was responsible to acquire the knowledge related to 
a certain topic (awareness mechanisms in CSCW environments, usability and tangible 
interfaces). Each student studied in an individual manner the assigned topic and s/he 
proposed  a  brief  summary  that  is  going  to  be  worked  in  the  activity.  Next  section 
explains how do the different activities that conform CET were performed during the 
experimentation process. 

 

 

350 

I.D. Claros et al. 

4.2   The Process Step-by-Step 

During the pre-test stage the following activities were performed:  

Definition of a coordinator (5 min): Each group selected a coordinator, who has the 
responsibility to promote and solve discussions, and also to coordinate the activity in 
a way that permit to achieve the group goal in an efficient manner.  

Resolution of questions in an individual way (15 min): Based on the preliminary research,
 every student gave an answer to questions of every topic. UT groups did the 
work using paper sheets, while ULD groups used the Digital Workbook.  

Experts Meeting (15 min): Students from different working groups, that have the same 
question  to  answer,  were  organized  by  pairs  in  order  to  discuss  every  question  and 
response (Fig. 4). Changes or updates to their responses are saved as a new version of 
the answer.  

Group meeting (15 min): Once the experts meeting has finished, working groups meet 
and discuss the responses to the assigned questions. Any change is saved as another 
version of the response. All documents are sent to the instructor; the ULD groups do 
not need to do that, because the tool provides such service automatically. 

 

 

Fig. 4. Expert meeting (ULD left, UT center, working groups right) 

During the test stage we applied a traditional test, where one of pre-test question was 
included. We did not use any technological application to support this stage. During 
the post-test the working groups were organized in order to analyze their responses, 
including  some  annotations  and  notes  if  they  needed.  The  post-test  considered  an 
additional bonus in the score that was added to the average between pre-test and test. 
The activity finished when students graded the exam as a whole. 

After that, students participated in a discussion about the topics worked and they 
talked  about  the  experience  of  this  collaborative  practice.  At  the  end,  they  did  an 
exercise that consisted in an essay about the formulation of awareness mechanisms in 
tangible interfaces, in order analyze if students really understood the topics. Although 
this phase is not considered as a part of CET, we think adequate to perform this activity 
to analyze if there was an appropriation of the concepts worked in the CET activity.
 Finally, we did an interview to the students and they also fill a survey about the 
experience.  

 

 

 

Digital Workbook: A Mobile Learning Environment 

351 

4.3   Obtained Results 

Table 1 depicts the results obtained during the experience. Groups A, B, C, D, and E 
were working without digital workbook. However groups F and G were working with 
the  digital  workbook.  At  the  end  of  each  phase  the  students  presented  a  document 
with responses to the proposed questions. According to these results we can observe 
all groups improved their scores after pre-test. This could imply the CET is a mechanism 
that permits to support teaching-learning processes in an independent way, if it 
is  mediated  by  a  computer.  Although  all  groups  improved  their  results  comparing 
grades from pre-test to test, those who were working with Tablet PC got a better performance 
 (their  grades  improved  from  3,5  to  4,37  and  from  3,8  to  4,4  into  a  scale 
from  1  to  5).  More  important  is  the  level  of  improvement  obtained  by  the  groups 
using the digital workbook, which was between 0,6 and 0,9 points. 

Table 1. Experimental Results 

 

 

CET 

Pre-test 

Test 

Final 

Document 

 

Final 
Grade 

 

Bond  
Post-test 
+0.10 
+0.05 
+0.10 
+0.05 
+0.15 
+0.10 
+0.10 

Final 
CET 
4.20 
4.48 
4.33 
4.12 
4.48 
4.47 
4.50 

4.1 
4.4 
4.6 
4.3 
4.5 
4.5 
4.6 

4.00 
4.27 
4.23 
3.90 
4.3 
3.50 
3.80 

4.10 
4.43 
4.23 
4.07 
4.33 
4.37 
4.40 

4.15 
4.44 
4.46 
4.21 
4.49 
4.48 
4.55 

A – UT 
B – UT 
C – UT 
D – UT 
E – UT 
F – ULD 
G – ULD 
 
It is clear that in CSCL scenarios technology is not the only variable that could influence 
an improvement of the students’ performance. It is necessary to structure the 
collaborative activities convey a real collaboration. In our experience CET has shown 
to  be  a  good  technique  that  helps  improve  teaching-learning  process  and  the  use  of 
supporting  technology  helps  to  perform  the  activity  in  a  better  way.  The  results  we 
obtained were based on quantitative date of the results of the test, for future experimentations 
 we  are  going  to  include  qualitative  aspects  like  some  survey  about  the 
experience of the technique and software tool. During these experimentations we have 
not included the comments of the teacher about the experience. We hope to include 
experience of the teachers using the Model and software tool we have developed for 
further work.  

5   Conclusions and Further Work 

This  article  presented  a  mobile  collaborative  application,  named  digital  workbook, 
which  supports  activities  involved  in  the  collaborative  evaluation  technique  (CET) 
[2]. The metaphor embedded in the digital workbook seems to be appropriate to perform 
the CET activities. This result can be observed through positive impact the tool 

 

352 

I.D. Claros et al. 

has had not only to support the experience but also the learning goals. However there 
is  a  need  to  establish  design  guidelines  to  mitigate  the  usability  problems  that  still 
have the technologies for hand-writing on Tablet PCs. 

 The digital workbook can also be used to support other collaborative learning activities,
 because it is possible to use its services in an autonomous way and independently 
of any other component.  The monitoring capability of the tool can also be used 
to  support  other  collaboration  activities.  Although  the  obtained  results  are  still  preliminary,
  the  use  of  the  tool  has  shown  to  be  consistently  attractive  and  useful  for 
students  and  instructors.  The  next  steps  in  this  work  involve  more  experimentation 
instances that allow understand the real impact of this proposal including the evaluation 
 of  the  CETProfessor  in  order  to  determine  how  awareness  aspects  we  have  includes 
could support instructor in the teaching-learning process. 

Acknowledgements 

This  work  has been supported by the  LACCIR Grant  R0308LAC001, and Proyecto 
Enlace VID 2010 (University of Chile), Grant ENL 10/10. 

References  

1.  Johnson, D., Johnson, R.: Circles of Learning. Association for Supervision and Curriculum 

Development, Washington (1984) 

2.  Ochoa, S., Guerrero, L., Pino, J., Collazos, C., Fuller, D.: Improving Learning by Collaborative 
Testing. Student-Centered Learning Journal 1(3), 123–135 (2003) 

3.  Neyem,  A.,  Ochoa,  S.F.,  Pino,  J.:  Integrating  Service-Oriented  Mobile  Units  to  Support 

Collaboration in Ad-hoc Scenarios. J. of Univ. Comp. Science 14(1), 88–122 (2008) 

4.  OneNote  Developers  Center,  http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/office/aa905452.aspx  (last 

access: March 2010) 

5.  Claros, I., Collazos, C., Lara, A., Ochoa, S., Guerrero, L.: Arquitectura Multi-agente para la 
Gestión de Información de Awareness en Entornos CSCL. In: XXI Encuentro Chileno de 
Computación (ECC 2009), Santiago, Chile, pp. 240–246 (November 2009) 

6.  Ochoa, S., Collazos, C., Bravo, G., Neyem, A., Ormeño, E., Guerrero, L.: Una técnica de 
evaluación  colaborativa  soportada  por  computador  para  escenarios  de  educación  superior. 
In: IX Congreso Internacional Interacción, pp. 71–80. Albacete, España (June 2008) 

7.  Tschudin,  C.,  Lundgren,  H.,  Nordström,  E.:  Embedding  MANETs  in  the  Real  World.  In: 
Conti,  M.,  Giordano,  S.,  Gregori,  E.,  Olariu,  S.  (eds.)  PWC  2003.  LNCS,  vol. 2775,  pp. 
578–589. Springer, Heidelberg (2003) 

 

