Supporting Real-Time Message Delivery
in Disaster Relief Eﬀorts: An Analytical

Approach

Rodrigo M. Santos1(B), Javier Orozco1, Sergio F. Ochoa2, Roc Meseguer3,

and Daniel Mosse4

1 Dpto. de Ing. El´ectrica y de Computadoras, UNS - IIIE, CONICET,

Bah´ıa Blanca, Argentina

ierms@criba.edu.ar

2 Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile

3 Universitat Polit`ecnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain

4 University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, USA

Abstract. Several initiatives propose the use of opportunistic networks
and heterogeneous devices to help overcome the communication and
coordination limitations evidenced during ﬁrst response activities in disaster 
relief scenarios. These solutions tend to create an Internet of Things
ecosystem in which most components are mobile, autonomous and interact 
with other in a loosely-coupled fashion. Regardless the beneﬁts provided 
by these infrastructures, the message delivery on them does not
consider time constraints. This aspect is particularly relevant in this
scenario since the time to conduct the ﬁrst response activities is quite
short, therefore they must be done quickly and coordinately. Trying to
help address this challenge, this paper proposes a message propagation
model for opportunistic networks that considers heterogeneous devices
and guarantees the real-time behavior of the network by bounding the
maximum delay for messages transmission. The message propagation is
modeled using an analytical approach. Two diﬀerent scheduling policies
are used to analyze the model and their feasibility conditions are proved.

Keywords: Opportunistic networks · Real-time message delivery · Disaster 
relief scenarios · Mobile computing ecosystem

1 Introduction

Every year natural disasters hit urban areas and produce dramatic losses in terms
of both, human life and damage to property. Example of these extreme events
are earthquakes, tsunamis, wild ﬁres, ﬂoods and volcano eruptions. Typically,
the ﬁrst 72 h after the event (known as the “golden relief time”) are the most
important ones, since after that the probability to ﬁnd survivors is really low [17].
In order to address the ﬁrst response, several teams are deployed in the ﬁeld,
which usually involve ﬁremen, police oﬃcers, medical personnel, and military
c(cid:2) Springer International Publishing AG 2017
S.F. Ochoa et al. (Eds.): UCAmI 2017, LNCS 10586, pp. 579–590, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-67585-5 57

580

R.M. Santos et al.

units. Each team has a leader that coordinates the activities inside the team,
with other team leaders, and also with an incident commander who is in charge
of the operations in the ﬁeld. In this scenario, it is very important to provide
communication and coordination capabilities to the ﬁrst responders.

When disasters strike, traditional communications collapse: telephone lines
fall down and cell phone towers if not down are usually overloaded with
messages and calls. Rescuers should use alternative communication channels.
Usually, the interactions are done with VHF/UHF radio systems since it
allows a quick deployment of the communication system, which is a mandatory
requirement [10]. However, these systems have several shortcomings, such as limited 
number of channels, messages being overwritten by more powerful devices
or mixed messages as transmitters are not well identiﬁed. Moreover, these radio
systems are limited to support resilient network protocols and topologies, keep
a multi-organizational coordination, and maintain information consistency [10].
Without an appropriate communication support, the decisions made by the incident 
commander and the team leaders are based only on their own experience,
since no or little information is available to support such activity. Moreover,
activities coordination becomes a challenge almost impossible to overcome. Given
this situation, it is not surprising to see improvisation in the ﬁeld [17], which
usually impact negatively on the emergency response process, as observed in the
Yarnell Hill Fire [6] and also in World Trade Center [11].

Many communication infrastructures have also been proposed to try deal
with the need of a suitable (digital) communication; most of them are based
on mobile ad hoc networks (MANETs) or opportunistic networks (OppNets),
and mobile computing devices [1,5,7,16]. Recently, these infrastructures have
been evolving toward the Internet of Thing (IoT) scenario, where many heterogeneous 
devices interconnected via MANETs or OppNets interact to provide
information support and also additional communication and coordination capability 
to ﬁrst responders [12,14]. The current availability of IoT-enabled devices
can help increase the resilience of the communication in the ﬁeld, by leveraging
their spontaneous wireless networking capabilities while the conventional communication 
infrastructure is out of service [15].

In [17] the use of an opportunistic network for collaborative applications (like
the one needed in the ﬁrst hours after a natural disaster) is analyzed and the
ﬁrst concepts of time constraints are introduced. In [18] there is an analysis of
real-time traﬃc for the case of FIFO scheduling at the gateway without priorities.
In [2] the authors analyze the stochastic performance of diﬀerent routing
strategies under diﬀerent inter-meeting times distributions. The authors do not
contemplate a real-time behavior as no deterministic guarantee is provided.
Additionally, the use of mules has been proposed in previous works, as a way
to keep the network resilient in case of node failures or to transport data in distributed 
networks that cover wide areas without communications infrastructure
(or with limited connections among nodes). In [9] diﬀerent techniques are proposed 
to determine the mules paths considering the geographic conditions and
the infrastructure present. In [4] a trade-oﬀ analysis is presented to minimize the

Supporting Real-Time Message Delivery in Disaster Relief Eﬀorts

581

number of mules in the system, while guaranteeing throughput requirements on
one side and the optimum path to cover the territory.

Regardless the usefulness of the previous works, they do not consider accomplishing 
with real-time restrictions for the message delivery. This requirement is
mandatory in disaster relief eﬀorts given the time constraints existing to conduct
the ﬁrst response activities during the golden relief time. In this sense, this proposal 
takes a step forward in order to try deal with a challenge that still remains
open. The proposal also opens the door to the participation of IoT world in these
solutions, since a wide variety of computing and sensing devices can become part
of this ecosystem.

The main contribution of this paper is a bounded message propagation model
for OppNets that involves IoT-enabled devices as nodes, and supports communication 
in the ﬁeld during ﬁrst responses. An analytical approach is used to represent 
the propagation model and the IoT-based communication infrastructure.
Although the message delivery in OppNets is based on a best eﬀort approach, it
can be used in several real-time environments if certain conditions are met. The
paper also introduces two message scheduling policies for these networks and
computes the maximum delay for the message delivery. With this information,
the feasibility of implementing a real-time OppNet is evaluated.

Next section describes the proposed model emphasizing in its role as facilitator 
of the message propagation in the disaster area. Section 3 shows the schedulability 
analysis of the proposed models. Section 4 presents an example, and Sect. 5
presents the conclusions and future work.

2 System Model

In a disaster relief scenario, the VHF radio systems used by ﬁrst response teams
although easy to use impose several limitations. In [13] some of the most important 
are explained. These are the impossibility to transmit digital information
and the lack of enough channels for all the teams and the general coordination.
 An alternative to address these limitations is to use mobile phones, but
after a disaster typically most infrastructure-based communication systems are
damaged or collapsed. Therefore, we follow [1,5,7] to use OppNets built upon
a multi-hop chain that transfers information from the command post to the
teams in the ﬁeld and back. As there are time restrictions, the transmissions
have real-time characteristics. Message end-to-end delay should be predictable.
Figure 1 shows a general deployment of ﬁrst response teams and the diﬀerent
actors involved in a disaster relief ecosystem. First response teams are typically
coordinated by an incident commander (IC), who is located in the command post
(in the ﬁeld). From there, the IC assigns tasks and coordinates activities of the
ﬁrst responders. Each team has a gateway, i.e., a person/device who is in charge
of coordinating activities with other teams. This node receives the information
from its team members and transfers it to the command post. At the same time,
it receives the orders and recommendations from the IC and transmits them to
the team members.

582

R.M. Santos et al.

Fig. 1. Mules routing for emergency handling. Gateways are marked in black; small
black circles are the gateways of the ﬁrst response teams

Typically, the area in which teams are deployed is large, and the distance
among the teams and also between them and the command post is too big
to allow for a direct link. To cope with this problem, mules are introduced
for transporting the messages in both directions. Mules can be implemented
in diﬀerent ways, for example with drones, motorcycles, cars (autonomous or
not), or even bicycles [8]. The information ﬂow in the system has four steps:
N → G → M ule → G → N. Where N denotes a node and G is the gateway
related to that node. We assume no gateway failures given that any node can
take over the role of the gateway.

In TDMA schemes, time is considered to be slotted and the duration of one
slot is considered as the unit of time. The duration of the slot is determined by
the system designer and it involves parameters like the speed of the mule and
the distance both in time and space between two consecutive mules.

From a communications point of view, each team is independent of any other.
That is, the communication being held inside a team has no inﬂuence on other
teams, either because they are working at a diﬀerent radio frequency channel or
because they are so distant that their radios are not interfering with each other.
Based on this, we can deﬁne the set of gateways: Γ = {G1, G2, . . . , Gn}. Each
of the n Gateways is responsible for interchanging messages with the mules and
the nodes. That is, mules only communicate with a node through a gateway. For
each Gi there is a set of ni nodes: NGi = {Ni1 , Ni2 , . . . , Nin

In real-time, system predictability is mandatory, as every possible situation
should be contemplated to guarantee the deadlines. Although contention based
protocols work well in the average, the back oﬀ algorithms introduce uncertainties 
at the transmission moment preventing their use in real-time communication
systems. Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) protocols are suitable for realtime 
operation as they are able to transmit messages in a predictable (bounded)
time, since each node has access to a transmission slot periodically.

}.

Supporting Real-Time Message Delivery in Disaster Relief Eﬀorts

583

∈ Gj has a set of μi messages to transmit, M(Nji) =
Each node Nji
}. Moreover, three types of messages are considered in
{mji1, mji2 , . . . , mjiµi
the system: periodic, sporadic and aperiodic. They are described by a tuple
mjih(cid:4)Pjih, Cjih, Djih(cid:5), where Pjih is the period or minimum intergeneration time
of the message, Cjih is the worst case time for transmitting a message and Djih
is the deadline. Both periodic and sporadic messages have to be received before
their deadlines, while aperiodic messages have no real-time constraint. That is,
deadlines associated with these messages are inﬁnite and they have the lowest
priority in the system; they are usually transmitted if there is time. Sporadic
messages are aimed to handle emergency calls, such as imminent possible explosions 
or breakdowns. Once a node generates a periodic or sporadic message, it
has to wait for the minimum time (speciﬁed by the period) to generate a new
one of the same kind.

3 Real-Time Schedulability Analysis

In this section, message scheduling is analyzed from a real-time point of view. We
determine that there are four scheduling stages: nodes-gateways, gateways-mules,
mules-gateways and gateways-nodes. In what follows, for illustration, feasible
conditions for each level are determined for two scheduling policies: First In
First Out (FIFO) and Rate Monotonic (RM) [3].

The end-to-end worst case transmission time requires the analysis of each
stage in the transmission process. Due to the real-time requirements, the scheduling 
in each stage is analyzed considering the worst case situation. Equation 1
establishes the end-to-end delay for a message mi originated at node i ∈ Gj and
destined to node h ∈ Gk.

Tend to end,i = TN G + W aitG + W aitM + TGN

(1)

where TN G is the time required for the message to go from the node to the gateway;
 W aitG is the time the message spends in the gateway until it is completely
uploaded to the mule; W aitM stands for the time the message is in the mule
until it is received by the destination gateway; and TGN is the time required for
the message to go from the gateway to the destination node.

In Sect. 3.2 we will show how these variables are derived for FIFO and Rate

Monotonic scheduling protocols, and shown in Eqs. 2 and 3.

3.1 Node-Gateway

For real-time messages, TDMA variants have been proposed [19]. TDMA reserves
a slot in every frame for each node that needs to transmit. Node’s clocks should
be synchonized. The ﬁrst response teams may have between 10 and 30 people [6],
plus a set of sensors for a maximum of 40–50 nodes in a team.

Each node transmits in a ﬁxed slot time, τ, in every frame Tf . The worst
situation for a message in a node is to be generated just after its time slot. In

584

R.M. Santos et al.

that case, the node will have to wait for the next frame before being able to
start to transmit the message. If message length C is greater than τ, a total of
Tf = (cid:6)C/τ(cid:7) frames would be necessary.

If the node has several messages to transmit, diﬀerent approaches can be
considered. The simplest one is to assume a FIFO order; in that case, the worst
case situation occurs when the message is the last one in the node’s queue, MQ.
Lemma 1. For a maximum of |M Q| messages in a node, the worst case delay
for a single node to transmit a message to a gateway with FIFO order is given by:

TN G = Tf

(cid:3)

|M Q|(cid:2)

i=1

(cid:4)

Ci
τ

(2)

Note: we dropped the subindex reﬂecting the gateway and the node, because we
are just analyzing the node delay, which is independent of the others.

In case that rate monotonic (RM) order is used for transmitting, each priority 
level has its queue, where messages wait for being transmitted. In that
case, higher priority messages are always dispatched before lower priority ones.
Typically, the number of priority levels is restricted for implementation details.

Lemma 2. Equation 3 deﬁnes the delay to transmit a message from a single
node to the gateway with rate monotonic ordering. Where HP denotes the set
of higher priority messages.

min t s.t t = Tf

(cid:3)

|M Q|(cid:2)

i=1

(cid:4)

Ci
τ

+

(cid:3)

(cid:2)

j∈HP

(cid:4)

(cid:4)

(cid:3)

Tf

Cj
τ

t
Tj

(3)

Within the ﬁrst response team, the gateway is another node with its own time
slice within the frame. Therefore, the previous analysis is valid for the reverse
case in which messages are transmitted from the gateway to the node. In other
words, the GN and NG delays can be analyzed jointly.

3.2 Gateway-Mule-Gateway

Once messages are queued in the gateway for transmission, the following two
hops (gateway-mule and mule-gateway) are analyzed together, given their symmetry.
 The message exchange between the mule and the gateway can begin as
soon as they get into communication range and continue until they lose contact.
 When the mule and the gateway are within transmission range, they will
exchange messages in a full-duplex way. The number of messages that they can
exchange is then only restricted by the time interval in which they are within
range.

The period of the mule, Pmu, can then be seen as the sum of two time
windows, Pmu = B+W , where B is the duration of the blind window (i.e., when a
gateway cannot transmit to the mule), and W is the duration of the transmission

Supporting Real-Time Message Delivery in Disaster Relief Eﬀorts

585

window. Pmu represents the interval of time between two consecutive mules
connecting to the gateway.
Let us assume that ∀i Ci = C, The interval of time in which the mule is within
transmission range with the gateway is the transmission window, noted W .
Thus, the number of messages ω uploaded to the mule by the gateway in the
transmission window can be obtained from equation: ω = W/C

The mules may have a queue for each gateway, so messages with destination
nodes in the network of a particular gateway are enqueued there. The queuing
capacity of a mule is equal to the number of messages that can be delivered during
the transmission window. To guarantee that all the messages in the system are
delivered by their deadlines, we have to ensure that enough mules are present
for this, either by enlarging the transmission window or by incorporating more
mules to the system. The number of mules in the system is notated ξ.

Mules start their trajectory at a certain gateway. This gateway has a privileged 
situation with respect to the others as it will always ﬁnd an empty queue,
while the following ones will have to wait for the arrival of a mule with an empty
queue. This fact has to be considered when computing the set of messages that
each gateway has to schedule. While the ﬁrst gateway in the path only deals
with the messages originated in its nodes, downstream gateways will have to
consider their own messages and also those from the previous ones. Although
these messages are not actually served by the gateway, they interfere with the
transmission. The position within the path determines the priority in the same
way a “daisy chain” arrangement does it.

The set of messages that gateway Gj has to deal with, is the union of all the
messages from its nodes, plus all the messages generated in upstream gateways:

M(Gj) = ∪j−1

h=1

∪nh

i=1

∪μi

x=1

mhix

(4)

where nj is the number of nodes connected to gateway Gj and μi is the number
of messages originating in node Nji of gateway Gj. The bandwidth required by
the set of messages associated to gateway Gj is given by:

UM (Gj ) =

j(cid:2)

nj(cid:2)

μi(cid:2)

h=1

i=1

x=1

Chix
Phix

(5)

Lemma 3. For a gateway Gj to be able to transmit its messages, the bandwidth
demand for the set of messages associated to it should be:

UM (Gj ) ≤ ξ

W
Pmu

(6)

FIFO: The waiting time for a message in a FIFO queue in the gateway is a
function of the number of messages Q, generated in the gateway Gj and the
interference that upstream gateways G1 to Gj−1 may introduce.

586

R.M. Santos et al.

Lemma 4. Provided (6) is satisﬁed, the worst-case waiting time for a message
arriving to the gateway Gj is given by:

(cid:4)j−1

(cid:4)nj

h=1

i=1

(cid:4)µi

(cid:5)

(cid:6)

t

Phix

Chix

x=1
ω

⎡
⎢⎢⎢

⎤
⎥⎥⎥ Pmu (7)

W aitGj = minimum t s.t. t = B + Q · C +

The time spent by messages in the mule is just the time used by the mule to
reach the destination gateway, because once messages are uploaded to the mule,
they will be delivered at the destination gateway. W aitmu = Ttrip.
Rate Monotonic: The use of rate monotonic priority order in the system is conditioned 
by the “daisy chain” disposition of the gateways. To avoid priority
inversions that could eventually produce starvation in some gateways, the store-
and-forward mechanism is used along the way. Like before, the mules queue
length is equal to the amount of messages that can be uploaded to the mule
while being in the transmission range of the gateway, ω.

Let us assume ω = 2, there are three gateways, each one has a message and
they are in reverse order of priority. Therefore, the ﬁrst message has the lowest
priority, but as it is the ﬁrst in the “daisy chain” it is uploaded to the mule. In the
second gateway, the medium priority message is uploaded. When the mule gets
to the third gateway, the high priority message has to be uploaded to prevent a
priority inversion, and the lowest priority message is exchanged by the highest
priority one. To do this, the transmissions between the gateways and the mules
are assumed to be full-duplex.

Like in the FIFO case, gateways downstream have to consider the interference
of higher priority messages from upstream gateways. Note that the transmission
order is not aﬀected by the gateway position; it is only aﬀected by the priority
of messages, making the overall system fair.
Lemma 5. Under Rate Monotonic order and subject to Eq. (6), a message m
of priority π will have the worst case delay (in the gateway-mule-gateway path)
given by:

W aitGj = minimum t s.t. t =

C + B

(cid:2)

∀m∈π

(cid:3)

(cid:4)

t

Pmu

+

(cid:2)

∀χ∈HP

(cid:3)

(cid:4)

t
Pχ

C

(8)

Mule Transport Time. In both cases, FIFO and RM, Ttrip is the time spent
by the message in the mule, which corresponds to the time the mule moves from
the gateway where it got the message to the destination node, through its ﬁxed
path. Clearly, this is independent of the scheduling algorithm that is chosen
and depends only on the technology used for the mules and other optimization
criteria (e.g., saving fuel).

3.3 Scheduling Condition
Lemma 6. An opportunistic network operating with mules and gateways implementing 
FIFO or RM order is schedulable if:

∀mijh Dijh ≥ Tend to end,ijh

(9)

Supporting Real-Time Message Delivery in Disaster Relief Eﬀorts

587

4 Example

The following example shows the main characteristics of both FIFO and Rate
Monotonic orderings at the gateway and how messages are delivered in each
case by the mule. Let’s suppose there are two mules in the system and that
the round trip is Trt = 10. The distance between the mules is 5, that is the
period of the mule is Tp = 5. In the worst case, the blind window is B = 3
leaving only 2 slots for the transmission window, W = 2. It is assumed that all
messages have the same length and that it is equal to the slot. The gateways
have queue length |M Q| = 3. With these parameters, the gateway can transfer
to the mule only two messages in each transmission window, ω = 2. As the
mules move around the ring in one direction, in the worst case, the destination
is just upstream and almost a whole round is needed for the mule to reach it. As
W = 2 and Trt = 10, in the worst case the trip takes Ttrip = 8 slots. Let the set
of messages be: M(G) = {(6, 1, 40, 1), (6, 1, 40, 1), (15, 1, 100, 2)}. For the case of
FIFO ordering all messages have the same priority and are put into the queue
in order of arrival, for example m1, m2 and m3. With Fixed Priorities, messages
m1 and m2 have the highest priority in the gateway so they are transmitted
whenever the mule is in range.

For the FIFO ordering, Fig. 2 shows the evolution of the message transmission
from the gateway to the mule. Each message is represented in a diﬀerent row and
color while the mule is represented in the last one with two colors, grey for the
blind window and white for the transmission one. Arrows indicate the instant
at which the messages arrive to the gateway. As can be seen, messages arrive
just after the transmission window ﬁnishes. With the arrival of a new mule, two
messages are uploaded. In this case m1 and m2. The boxes in the messages rows
indicate that the messages are uploaded to the mule. The worst case response
time is given by Eq. 7.

For the case of RM ordering, there are two queues one for each priority. The
worst case waiting time is given by Eq. 8, for messages (m1, m2) and m3 is t = 5
and t = 24, respectively. In Fig. 3 the evolution of the messages transmissions
are shown. Only at t = 24 in accordance with Eq. 8 message m3 is able to get
into the mule.

From the example, it is clear that RM beneﬁts higher priority messages by
delivering them ﬁrst. However, as can be seen in Figs. 2 and 3 in both cases m3
is dispatched and there is no backlog in the queue at the moment t = 31.

The traﬃc towards the gateways is restricted to 20% only for each mule.
The network conﬁguration and the time required for a mule to do a round-trip
and the fact that there is only one going through a gateway each time, it is
deduced that there are a maximum of two mules. So the maximum traﬃc in the
network towards any gateway should not be greater than 40%. If all the messages
in the gateway are transmitted towards only one gateway and considering that
the demand is 36.7%, with the two mules mentioned it is enough to satisfy the
demand.

Figures 4 and 5 show how both mules deliver the messages in destiny. Each
mule is represented in a diﬀerent row. In white, it is shown a previous message

588

R.M. Santos et al.

m1

m2

m3

blind

0

2

4

6

8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30

Fig. 2. FIFO ordering, m1, m2 and m3, m3 is able to get into the mule at t = 9.

m1

m2

m3

blind

0

2

4

6

8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30

Fig. 3. RM ordering, m1, m2 and m3, m3 is able to get into the mule at t = 24

M1

M2

M1

M2

11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33 35 37 39 41 43

Fig. 4. m1, m2 and m3. FIFO order in the gateway

11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33 35 37 39 41 43

Fig. 5. m1, m2 and m3. RM order in the gateway

Supporting Real-Time Message Delivery in Disaster Relief Eﬀorts

589

that M1 may have queued before m1 and m2. The temporal sequence is correlated
with Figs. 2 and 3, as can be seen the destination of messages originated in
the gateway are just prior to coming back so the mule needs to do almost a
complete round-trip before delivering the ﬁrst message. The example shows that
it is possible to deliver all the messages with just two mules.

It is necessary to compute the schedulability of the network by computing
the delays in the gateways by using Eqs. (10) and (11) for the FIFO and RM
respectively.

Tend to end = N G + 9 + 19 + GN = N G + 28 + GN

Tend to end,m1 = N G + 5 + 19 + GN = N G + 24 + GN
Tend to end,m2 = N G + 5 + 19 + GN = N G + 24 + GN
Tend to end,m3 = N G + 24 + 19 + GN = N G + 43 + GN

(10)

(11)

From the previous results it is clear that the system is schedulable if the
delay in the transit of messages from the nodes to the gateway and the gateway
to the nodes is less than: N G + GN ≤ Di − Tend to end,i.

5 Conclusions and Future Work

In this paper a model for real-time communications among search and rescue
teams and incident commander in disaster relief areas is proposed. A bounded
message propagation model for OppNets that involves IoT-enabled devices as
nodes, and supports communication in the ﬁeld during ﬁrst responses is introduced.
 Two scheduling policies were analyzed (FIFO and RM) in this context.
While the ﬁrst one facilitates the unrestricted information ﬂow, the second one
introduces priorities that guarantee that important messages arrive ﬁrst to destination.
 Particularly, the analytic results show that the RM helps improve the
response times of high priority messages, which usually are those that make a difference 
in disaster relief scenarios. These results provide predictability to real-time
message propagation in an OppNet which is the main contribution of the paper.
Next steps in this initiative considers performing a proof-of-concept to verify
the analytic results obtained based on the proposed model, and thus determine
more accurately the impact of this proposal for both, the research community
and the application domain.

Acknowledgments. This work was partially supported by the Spanish government
(TIN2016-77836-C2-2-R).

References

1. Arimura, S., Uchida, N., Shibata, Y.: Self power supplied micro wireless ballooned
network for disaster recovery. In: Advanced Information Networking and Applications 
Workshops (WAINA), pp. 255–260 (2013)

2. Boldrini, C., Conti, M., Passarella, A.: Performance modelling of opportunistic

forwarding under heterogenous mobility. Comput. Commun. 48, 56–70 (2014)

590

R.M. Santos et al.

3. Cayssials, R., Orozco, J., Santos, J., Santos, R.: Rate monotonic scheduling of realtime 
control systems with the minimum number of priority levels. In: Proceedings
of the 11th Euromicro Conference on Real-Time Systems, pp. 54–59 (1999)

4. Das, A., Mazumder, A., Sen, A., Mitton, N.: On mobile sensor data collection
using data mules. In: Proceedings of Computing, Networking and Communications
(ICNC), pp. 1–7 (2016)

5. Gomez, K., Goratti, L., Rasheed, T., Reynaud, L.: Enabling disaster-resilient 4G

mobile communication networks. IEEE Commun. Mag. 52(12), 66–73 (2014)

6. Hardy, K., Comfort, L.K.: Dynamic decision processes in complex, high-risk oper-

ations: The Yarnell hill ﬁre, June 30 2013. Saf. Sci. Part A 71, 39–47 (2015)

7. Herlich, M., Yamada, S.: Motivation for a step-by-step guide to set up wireless
disaster recovery networks. In: Proceedings of Information and Communication
Technologies for Disaster Management (ICT-DM), pp. 64–70 (2015)

8. Huang, C.M., Lan, K.c., Tsai, C.Z.: A survey of opportunistic networks. In:
Advanced Information Networking and Applications - Workshops (WAINA), pp.
1672–1677. IEEE (2008)

9. Jain, G., Babu, S., Raj, R., Benson, K., Manoj, B., Venkatasubramanian, N.:
On disaster information gathering in a complex shanty town terrain. In: Global
Humanitarian Technology Conference-South Asia Satellite (GHTC-SAS), pp. 147–
153 (2014)

10. Manoj, B.S., Baker, A.H.: Communication challenges in emergency response. Commun.
 ACM 50(3), 51–53 (2007)

11. Mendon¸ca, D.: Decision support for improvisation in response to extreme events:
learning from the response to the 2001 world trade center attack. Decis. Support
Syst. 43(3), 952–967 (2007)

12. Monares, ´A., Ochoa, S.F., Herskovic, V., Santos, R., Pino, J.A.: Modeling interactions 
in human-centric wireless sensor networks. In: Proceedings of Computer
Supported Cooperative Work in Design (CSCWD), pp. 661–666 (2014)

13. Monares, ´A., Ochoa, S.F., Pino, J.A., Herskovic, V., Rodriguez-Covili, J., Neyem,
A.: Mobile computing in urban emergency situations: improving the support to
ﬁreﬁghters in the ﬁeld. Expert Syst. Appl. 38(2), 1255–1267 (2011)

14. Monares, ´A., Ochoa, S.F., Santos, R., Orozco, J., Meseguer, R.: Modeling IoTbased 
solutions using human-centric wireless sensor networks. Sensors 14(9),
15687–15713 (2014)

15. Petersen, H., Baccelli, E., W¨ahlisch, M., Schmidt, T.C., Schiller, J.: The role of
the Internet of Things in network resilience. In: Giaﬀreda, R., Cag´aˇnov´a, D., Li,
Y., Riggio, R., Voisard, A. (eds.) IoT360 2014. LNICSSITE, vol. 151, pp. 283–296.
Springer, Cham (2015). doi:10.1007/978-3-319-19743-2 39

16. Santos, R., Mosse, D., Znati, T., Comfort, L.: Design and implementation of a
witness unit for opportunistic routing in tsunami alert scenarios. Saf. Sci. 90, 75–
83 (2015)

17. Santos, R., Ochoa, S.F.: Disseminating shared information in disaster relief eﬀorts:
a communication computable model. In: Proceedings of Systems, Man, and Cybernetics 
(SMC), pp. 3446–3451 (2011)

18. Santos, R., Orozco, J., Ochoa, S.F.: A real-time analysis approach in opportunistic

networks. ACM SIGBED Rev. 8(3), 40–43 (2011)

19. Yun, C., Lim, Y.K.: ASO-TDMA: ad-hoc self-organizing tdma protocol for shipborne 
ad-hoc networks. EURASIP J. Wirel. Commun. Netw. 2012(1), 1–13 (2012)

