A Clinically Assisted Collaborative System Architecture

for Preventing Falls in Elderly People

Javier Orozco1, Rodrigo Santos1, Sergio Ochoa2, Leo Ordinez1,

Roc Messeguer3, and Nelson Baloian2

1 Dep. Electrical Engineering and Computers, IIIE, UNS-CONICET, Argentina

2 Computer Science Department, Universidad de Chile, Chile

3 Computer Science Department, Universidad Politecnica de Catalunya, Spain

Abstract. Falls in older adults are not only frequent but also potentially disabling
for them. Detecting and preventing these falls have an important impact in the life
of the elderly people. This paper presents the architecture of a pervasive system
designed to perform early detection of older adults in risk of falling or fell down.
The system notiﬁes the appropriate people or healthcare organizations in case
of detecting a fall of the monitored person. This monitoring process produces
minimum disruption in the life style of the elderly.

Keywords: Falls Prevention and Detection, Pervasive Healthcare.

1 Introduction

Advances in embedded systems and new communication technologies have opened
many opportunities to address healthcare procedures, treatments and strategies to deal
with several illnesses. For instance, wireless sensing technology has shown to be successful 
in monitoring elderly people suffering chronic diseases or living alone.

Falls in older adults represent one of the main causes of hospitalization, and they are
also responsible not only of causing disabling fractures and other physical injuries, but
also psychological traumas that reduce their independence and conﬁdence [1]. Detecting 
falls using sensors is not a simple task, particularly if the solution should be pervasive,
 keep the privacy of the monitored persons and accurately recognize their current
condition [2]. Detecting people in risk of falling is still more useful, but complex.

This paper presents the architecture of a pervasive system that helps prevent falls of
older adults, by doing early detection of people in risk of falling. The system involves
a combination of wearable sensors connected through a Body Area Network (BAN)
and a smartphone that runs a software application. The former captures the information
from a set of wearable sensors embedded in an ad hoc digital device, which is wore by
the monitored person. Such information is sent to the software component running in
the elderly smartphone, which is in charge of determining the current condition of the
person (normal, with risk of falling, fell down). If the system detects a fall, it delivers
alerts to the supporting people or healthcare organizations in order to obtain ﬁrst aids
as soon as possible.

L. Pecchia et al. (Eds.): IWAAL 2014, LNCS 8868, pp. 111–114, 2014.
c(cid:2) Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014

112

J. Orozco et al.

2 Related Work

It has been shown that falls are one important cause of disability and also death in
elderly people living alone [3]. Nevertheless, there is not a deﬁnite solution to this
problem yet [4]. One possible approach to detect falls involves the use of wearable
sensors (e.g. gyroscopes, accelerometers, or microphones) to collect data that helps
identify falling situations [2]. These sensors can be used not only to detect falls, but
also to identify periods with a high probability of falling; e.g. because the person periodically 
loses his stability when moving. In [1] the authors report a monitoring system
to determine repetitive behavior patterns and falls in the elderly. In [4] a frail studio is
presented. Frailty is a syndrome associated to the ederly that leads to falls. With the system 
proposed, a frailty coefﬁcient is computed for instrumenting different prevention
therapies. In [5] a mechanism based on the smartphone accelerometer is used to gather
information that helps physicians to diagnose and treat cardiologic pathologies. In [6]
it is proved that Bluetooth networks are useful for interconnecting wearable sensors,
however these networks have not bandwidth enough for doing real-time monitoring of
some pathologies; e.g. cardiovascular diseases. In fact, it is shown that most monitoring
systems require performing a ﬁrst processing of the collected data in order to reduce the
information transmitted to the formal processing unit. In [7] the authors use NFC and
RFID technologies to determine the localization of patients at a hospital, avoiding thus
various patient identiﬁcation problems. This type of technology has been successfully
used for monitoring people activities. Clearly, there are several previous works related
to the early detection of falls and monitoring diseases in elderly people. However, none
of them present an integral, non-intrusive and self-trained system, able to be customized
by a physician considering the patients features and also the situations to be detected.

3 System Architecture

The proposed system for detecting falls and vulnerable situations in elderly people has
two main components: a BAN that interconnects a set of wearable sensors and a collaborative 
application that runs in the elderlys smartphone. This latter determines the
current probability of fall risk in the older adult that is being monitored. It uses the
data collected from the sensors, which is processed and transmitted to the smartphone
through the BAN. This solution requires that the monitored person wears a digital device 
that implements the BAN and embeds most of the sensors.

This device can be attached to the people belt producing minimum disruption to
the user. The system collaboratively balances the computational load, optimizing thus
the energy consumption of the BAN and the smartphone application. Figures 1.a and
1.b show the architecture of both, the master wearable sensor (the digital device that
represents the main component of the BAN) and the collaborative application running 
in the smartphone. The master wearable sensor (Fig. 1.a) embeds several small,
lightweight and efﬁcient (in terms of energy consumption) sensors, which usually have
limited capability for data processing and exchange. This master sensor is implemented
as an integrated circuit, designed to accomplish one or more activities. In this case, the
component includes a pulse meter, a gyroscope, an accelerometer, a microphone, the

A Clinically Assisted Collaborative System Architecture

113

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1. (a) Architecture of the master wearable sensor, (b) Architecture of the smartphone software
application

BAN-user-interface and a Bluetooth interface to keep a communication link with the
smartphone. It also includes the logic to locally detect falls and instability patterns in
the monitored people.

The wearable master sensor captures the body inclination and other clinically typiﬁed 
movements, which commonly precede a fall in impaired persons or people suffering
certain pathologies. In order to do that, the data captured from the sensors is classiﬁed
by the real-time classiﬁer, which builds an inference table based on classical algorithms
for decision making. Such a data is transmitted to the smartphone and processed accordingly.
 The software components monitoring the people motion and inactivity (Fig.
1.b) process this information trying to identify vulnerable or potentially vulnerable situations 
and alerting the person about the risky situation. Long periods of inactivity indicate
potential problems and eventual falls. The application running at the smartphone periodically 
records the user status in a server that may be hosted in the Cloud. If the system
detects a vulnerability situation or a fall, it notiﬁes the relatives or healthcare emergency
services about this situation. The target of these notiﬁcations and the channel used with
that purpose can be set during the deployment of the system. The communication channels 
include sms, email and some social networks and instant messaging systems, like
WhatApp. A detailed description of this system is available in [7].

In order to determine the level of vulnerability of a person in a certain time instant,
the system uses an inference matrix that was ﬁlled using results of clinical studies. The
columns of the matrix corresponds to clinical variables that contributes to identify instability 
of people; e.g. Orthostatic Hypotension. The rows of the matrix indicate four
movements that also help identify the people instability; e.g. from-sit-to-stand. Therefore,
 each cell establishes (based on clinical studies) the level of risk that a from-sit-tostand 
movement represents for a person having orthostatic hypotension for example.

The physician can conﬁgure the solution for a certain patient (i.e. an older adult)
by instantiating the clinical variables according to the results of the tests performed to
that person. The sensors identiﬁes the movements done by the elderly and based on the
recognized movement determine the current level of fall risk for that person. Computing
the risk indicators, based on the elderlys movements and the clinical variables for such
a person, it is possible to determine the instability level of that older adult. This value is
used to determine the next action to be performed by the system.

114

J. Orozco et al.

Table 1. Inference Table

Motion

PHT Incontinence Medication TSS>12s Walker Bath Bedroom

Sit to Stand H
H
L

Inctivity
Walking

H
M
H

H
L
M

H
L
L

H
L
M

H
L
H

M
L
L

4 Conclusions

This paper presents the architecture of a pervasive system designed to prevent and detect
falls in elderly people. Based on empirical, clinical and inferred data, the system determines 
the level of fall risk of the monitored person, and eventually it delivers alerts to
make the older adult aware of such a situation, preventing thus a possible accident. The
system utilizes both, real-time and stored information, to accurately determine when
delivering an alarm according to the elderly current activity and his clinical diagnostics.
If the fall is not avoided, an alarm is delivered to supporting people and healthcare emergency 
services to reduce the latency in the medical attention of the elderly. The system
implementation uses existing technology and it is currently in the ﬁrst evaluation phase.

Acknowledgments. This work was partially supported by the European Community
through the projects Community Networks Testbed for the Future Internet (CONFINE):
FP7-288535, and A Community networking Cloud in a box (Clommunity): FP7-317879,
and also by Spanish goverment under contract TIN2013-47245-C2-1-R, and also by the
Generalitat de Catalunya as a Consolidated Research Group 2014-SGR-881.

References

1. Ryannen, O.P., Kivea, S.L., Honkanen, R., Laippala, P.: Falls and lying helpless in the elderly.

Z Gerontol (25), 278–282

2. Ralhan, A.: A study on machine learning algorithms for fall detection and movement classiﬁcation.
 Master’s thesis, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of
Saskatchewan (2009)

3. Dumitrache, M., Pasca, S.: Fall detection algorithm based on triaxial accelerometer data. In:

E-Health and Bioengineering Conference (EHB), pp. 1–4 (November 2013)

4. Fontecha, J., Navarro, F., Herv´as, R., Bravo, J.: Elderly frailty detection by using
accelerometer-enabled smartphones and clinical information records. Personal and Ubiquitous 
Computing 17, 1073–1083 (2013)

5. Jara, A., Fern´andez, D., Lopez, P., Zamora, M., Ubeda, B., Skarmeta, A.: Evaluation of bluetooth 
low energy capabilities for continuous data transmission from a wearable electrocardiogram.
 In: 2012 Sixth International Conference on Innovative Mobile and Internet Services in
Ubiquitous Computing (IMIS), pp. 912–917 (July 2012)

6. Mart´ınez, M., Fontecha, J., Vizoso, J.R., Bravo, J., Cabrero-Canosa, M.J., Mart´ın, I.: RFID
and NFC in hospital environments: Reaching a sustainable approach. In: Bravo, J., L´opez-de-
Ipi˜na, D., Moya, F. (eds.) UCAmI 2012. LNCS, vol. 7656, pp. 125–128. Springer, Heidelberg
(2012)

7. Orozco, J., Santos, R., Ochoa, S., Ordinez, L., Meseguer, R.: Collaborative systems for supporting 
autonomous life in elderly people. Technical report, Universidad Nacional del Sur
(2014)

