Using Tablet PCs and Pen-Based Technologies to  

Support Engineering Education 

Ignacio Casas1, Sergio F. Ochoa2, and Jaime Puente3 

1 Department of Computer Science, Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile, Chile  

2 Department of Computer Science, Universidad de Chile, Chile 

3 Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA, USA 

icasas@ing.puc.cl, sochoa@dcc.uchile.cl, japuente@microsoft.com 

Abstract. Several experiences and results of the Tablet PC adoption have been 
reported,  mainly  in  American  universities.  Although  the  benefits  seem  to  be 
highly interesting, it is not clear if they are replicable in developing countries. 
In order to try to understand the impact of Tablet PCs on engineering education 
in Chile, the authors conducted several experiments at the two traditional Chilean 
 universities.  This  paper  reports  the  experiences  and  the  obtained  results, 
comparing them with those obtained in American universities.    

Keywords:  Tablet  PCs,  Pen-based  Technologies,  Engineering  Education,  
Mobile Computing. 

1   Introduction 

Every day more and more persons are adopting Tablet PCs as a way to support educational 
 activities.  Several  researchers  have  highlighted  the  contributions  of  these  
mobile computing devices and pen-based technologies as a support of the teachinglearning 
process [1, 8, 11]. Some of the envisioned benefits are the possibility to do 
hand-writing annotations keeping the metaphor of a paper notebook, and the capability 
 to  share  resources,  support  students  mobility  and  collaboration,  and  count  on  a 
mobile repository of educational material accessible and replicable.  

However  the  advantages  recognized  by  the  users  depend  on  the  features  of  the 
teaching-learning scenario. After four years using Tablet PCs in computer science [9] 
and  science  education  programs  [5],  we  have  seen  several  differences  between  the 
benefits  identified  by  instructors  and  students  from  developed  countries  (such  as 
USA) and from a developing country such as Chile.  

This  article  presents  a  preliminary  study  about  the  impact  the  use  of  Tablet  PCs 
and pen-based technologies have on undergraduate computer science programs at the 
two main universities in Chile. The study covers the perspective of the students and 
the instructors. It also analyzes the benefits, challenges and limitations perceived by 
students  and  instructors,  from  a  social  and  technological  viewpoint.  This  study  was 
conducted based on the recurrent use of three applications: Classroom Presenter [2], 
MOCET [9] and an extended version of MS OneNote [10].  

Next section presents the related works. Section 3 lists the benefits of using Tablet 
PCs for both, students and instructors. Section 4 shows the empirical study carried out 

J.A. Jacko (Ed.): Human-Computer Interaction, Part IV, HCII 2009, LNCS 5613, pp. 31–38, 2009. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009 

32 

I. Casas, S.F. Ochoa, and J. Puente 

by  the  authors  in  order  to  determine  the  impact  that  pen-based  computing  have  in 
engineering  education  in  the  two  main  Chilean  universities.  Section  5  discusses  the 
obtained results. Finally, section 6 shows the conclusions and the future work.  

2   Tablet PCs in High Education 

During  the  last  years  several  researchers  have  been  doing  experiments  in  order  to 
determine the impact of using Tablet PCs in education. Some of them believe that a 
“Tablet PC has the potential to dramatically alter the educational process. This new 
technology significantly changes the way students and teachers interact. It adds completely 
new dimensions to classroom interaction by providing digital ink and drawing 
tools for writing, sketching, and drawing; and for real-time collaboration” [1].  

At the  moment  we  have seen reports of particular experiences  where Tablet PCs 
have became interesting tools in certain scenarios. Now the challenge is to identify in 
which scenario the Tablet PCs can effectively add value. For example, Anderson et al. 
show how Tablet PCs can be used to improve the knowledge delivery and facilitate 
the  interaction  between  students  and  the  instructor  during  a  distributed  lecture  [2]. 
Berque et al. report the results of using Tablet PC and DyKnow tools to support collaborative 
problem solving [3]. Davis et al. and Anderson et al. report experiences of 
using  Tablet  PC  to  take  notes  during  a  class  [2,  4].  In  addition,  the  authors  have 
shown,  in  previous  works,  how  these  mobile  devices  can  be  used  to  improve  the 
evaluation process in computer science courses [9] and also to support the activities of 
communities  of  practice  in  science  education  [5].  There  are  also  several  articles  
describing educational experiences on physics, mathematics and agronomy, in which 
Tablet  PCs  have  been  used  as  the  supporting  platform  for  the  teaching-learning  
process. 

Considering the experiences reported in recent literature, and focusing just on the 
main features of the Tablet PCs, we can say that the main activities to be supported 
with these devices are the following ones: 

1. Taking notes. Students can take notes on the slides the professor shares with them, 
or  just  on  a  digital  blank  sheet.  These  digital  notes  can  be  organized,  shared, 
searched, emailed and linked to other resources [6]. In that sense, this functionality 
seems to be highly useful, and better than the paper notebook or even a laptop.  

2. Enrich the  lecture presentation. Instructors can  use Tablet PCs to enrich the  information 
they are presenting during a lecture. It could be used, for example, to do 
marks or make annotations on the slides, or use the Tablet PC as a replacement for 
(or  supplement  to)  the  black/whiteboard  [2].  Since  digital  annotations  made  on 
these devices can be shared, the cognitive load of the attendees is reduced. 

3. Support  group  work.  During  work  meetings  the  group  members  (i.e.  students 
and/or  instructors)  usually  carry  out  brainstorming,  discuss  proposals/alternatives 
to  carry  out  the  job,  and  validate  ideas  or  the  work  done.  Usually  a 
black/whiteboard is used to support these activities; however Tablet PCs could also 
be  used  for  this  purpose  [3].  A  benefit  of  using  these  devices  instead  of  whiteboards 
is that notes written on the space shared by the attendees are easier to record 
and share. In addition, it is not longer needed to erase the whiteboard because its 
physical space is completely used. 

 

Using Tablet PCs and Pen-Based Technologies to Support Engineering Education 

33 

In this list we have excluded the activities that can be performed with a laptop. In 
other words, we included just the activities requiring the special features of a Tablet 
PC. Please note there are activities that are variants of the listed ones, which were not 
included in the list. Summarizing, it seems the use of these computing devices could 
replace the use of the paper notebook and also the black/whiteboard. 

3   Impact on the Students and Instructors 

Experiences reported in the literature show the students are usually comfortable using 
Tablet PCs to take notes and perform problem-solving activities [13, 14, 15]. Something 
 similar  happens  with  the  instructors’  opinion  [5,  15].  In  addition,  most  of  the 
researchers  that  explore  the  use  of  these  devices  in  educational  scenarios  state  that 
Tablet PCs facilitate the active learning [12, 16][Roschelle et al., 2007]. Considering 
these previous works, some of the main contributions reported about the use of Tablet 
PCs, are the following ones: 
•  Benefits for students. Students recognize the possibility to take notes is an important 
contribution of Tablet PCs usage. The free-style handwriting possibility makes 
the  students  more  comfortable  to  express  their  ideas  in  sketches  or  annotations 
[14]. The possibility to exchange digital resources among the students (or with the 
instructors)  was  recognized  as  an  important  feature  [16].  Finally,  students  find 
valuable  the  possibility  to  store  and  manage  their  courses  information  in  digital 
format [16]. 

•  Benefits for instructors. Many instructors have found that Tablet PCs not only can 
replace the black/whiteboard, but also extend the resources pool to be used during 
a lecture [6]. It makes the lectures more dynamic and interactive [Roschelle et al., 
2007]. In addition, the annotations the instructor performs during a lecture can be 
easily stored and shared with the students. Several researchers report an increment 
of  the  students’  interest  during  the  classes  and  also  an  improvement  in  the  way 
used by the instructors to deliver  knowledge [13, 16].   

Based on the authors’ experience, many of the envisioned benefits are inherent to 
the use of laptops during lectures. Other benefits, for example the change of students’ 
and instructors’ attitude during the lectures, could be the result of the redesign of the 
teaching-learning process performed to take advantage of the Tablet PCs features. Of 
course, there are several benefits that really are a consequence of these devices usage, 
for  example  the  possibility  to  make  handwriting  annotations  on  the  lecture  slides. 
Next section describes a preliminary study carried out in two traditional Chilean universities,
 which tries to determine the impact of Tablet PCs in computer science and 
engineering courses. The study also discusses the obtained results and compares them 
with the findings reported by other researchers in USA.  

4   Empirical Study 

In order to try to understand the impact that the use of Tablet PCs could have in engineering 
education in Chile, the authors conducted an empirical study in two traditional 

34 

I. Casas, S.F. Ochoa, and J. Puente 

Chilean  universities:  Universidad  de  Chile  and  Pontificia  Universidad  Catolica  de 
Chile. This study was performed in computer science courses at the engineering school 
and it involved several types of Tablet PCs and also software products. 

4.1   Experience in the Universidad de Chile 

This  experience  involved  students  of  a  computer  science  course  (CC51A:  Software 
Engineering) during two semesters: fall 2008 (29 students) and spring 2008 (20 stu-
dents).  Ten  Tablet  PCs  were  delivered  among  the  students  in  order  to  support  two 
main activities: course examinations using MOCET [9] (Figure 1), and group prob-
lem-solving using MS OneNote [10]. In addition, the instructor used Classroom Presenter 
[2] during half of the course lectures, and students using Tablet PCs took notes 
during lectures using this software. When the course was finishing, the instructor and 
the students filled a survey that evaluated the experience of using these devices. Some 
of the issues identified by the participants were the following: 

 

 

Fig. 1. Use of MOCET at University of Chile 

•  The  hardware  matters.  Students  using  particular  models  of  Tablet  PCs  (DELL 
Latitude  XT  and  HP  Pavilion  TX1000)  consistently  reported  problems  to 
write/erase  annotations,  regardless  of  the  software  they  were  using.  In  addition, 
these students also reported precision problems when these devices recognize the 
stylus location on the screen. 

•  The working conditions matters. Students and the instructor identified the importance 
of avoiding situations where only some of the students had Tablet PCs. Some 
educational activities designed to take advantage of the Tablet PC features, for example 
 the  group  design,  were  difficult  to  perform  for  students  that  did  not  have 
available  these devices or a whiteboard. Therefore, if you are going to perform an 
activity that takes advantage of these devices’ features, be sure that all the students 
count with Tablet PCs.  

•  Training is  required. Students and the instructor reported an important improvement 
in the usefulness of the devices and the effectiveness of their work, once they 
were trained in the use of Tablet PCs. 

•  The  instructor  mobility  becomes  reduced.  Because  the  Tablet  PC  must  be  connected 
to the projector through a physical cable during a lecture, the mobility of the 

 

Using Tablet PCs and Pen-Based Technologies to Support Engineering Education 

35 

instructor becomes reduced. After some sessions the instructor started to use MaxiVista 
[7] as intermediary to recover the mobility. Although the solution was good, 
it required to have two computers in the classroom to deliver the lecture.  

•  Tablet PCs do not replace the blackboard. Although the Tablet PC’s functionalities 
are comparable to those of a whiteboard (and even better in some aspects), the 
information shown to the attendees through these devices is replaced when the instructor 
 change  the  slides.  In  the  case  of  the  whiteboard,  it  acts  as  an  extended 
screen of the instructor presentation; therefore it keeps visible the information written 
on it, even when the instructor changes the slides. In other words, students and 
the instructor think the whiteboard and the Tablet PC are complementary. 

•  Useful to make free-style annotations. Students and the instructor highlighted the 
capability  of  these  devices  to  make  free-style  handwriting  annotations.  Several 
software products were used to carry out this activity; all of them were useful and 
comfortable for the users.  

•  They are similar to laptops in several aspects. Students and the instructor identified 
as an important contribution the capability of mobile computing devices to record 
annotations and manage information in digital format. They also highlighted 
the  capabilities  of  these  devices  to  share  information  and  communicate  among 
them in a simple way, even when the users are on the move. However, these functionalities 
 are  not  only  available  in  Tablet  PCs,  but  also  in  laptops.  Something 
similar  occurs  with  the  possibility  to  perform  simulations,  or  execute  or  compile 
programs during the lectures. In other words, several of the advantages reported as 
result of the Tablet PCs usage are also present when using laptops. 

•  The  instructor  and  the  students  feel  comfortable  using  Tablet  PCs.  Users  felt 
comfortable  using  these  devices  during  the  experiences.  Although  some  training 
was required, the learning effort was worthy. 

•  Computing devices could be distracters during lectures. Students and the instructor 
agreed that mobile computing devices can be a distracting element during the 
lectures. If they do not have a clear role to play during the lecture, their use compete 
with the instructor’s speech. 

•  The  redesign  of  the  lecture  style  makes  them  more  active.  The  participants  in 
these  experiences  recognized  the  lectures  became  more  active  and  participative. 
However, it seems to be a consequence of the lectures style redesign more than a 
result of the use of Tablet PCs. 

4.2   Experience in Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile 

This section describes the experiences of introducing Tablet PCs in two courses at the 
Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile during 2007: “Computing Software Tools for 
Engineering”  which is a  workshop course (iic2100) and  “Introduction  to  Program-
ming” (iic1102). The main objective of the experiment was to motivate engineering 
students  to  learn  and  enjoy  the  art  of  problem  solving  and  project  team  work  supported 
by computers. In order to reach such a goal, we started to use Tablet PCs in the 
classroom  and  we  modified  the  dynamic  of  the  teaching-learning  process  in  these 
courses.  Tablet  PCs  were  used  in  the  classroom  for  modeling,  problem  solving  and 
programming. 

 

36 

I. Casas, S.F. Ochoa, and J. Puente 

Fig. 2. Use of OneNote at Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile 

 

The  course  iic2100  was  the  subject  of  this  experimentation  during  two  terms  in 
2007. Forty students participated in each semester. Twenty one Tablet PCs (HP Compact 
TC4200) were delivered among the students. These devices were shared by the 
students  and  they  were  used  to  support  problem  solving  during  lectures  (Figure  2). 
The  impact  of  the  Tablet  PCs  usage  was  measured  based  on  opinion  surveys  from 
students, teaching assistants and professors.  

A similar experimentation process was conducted in the course iic1102: Introduction 
to Programming, during the Fall and Spring terms in 2007. One hundred students 
participated each semester. Twenty one Tablet PCs (HP Compact TC4200) were delivered 
among the students in order to support group problem solving during lectures.  

In spite of all the positive aspects of the use of technologies in the classroom, a few 
problems were observed; for instance, annoying delays at the beginning of some activities 
 due  to  instability  of  the  wireless  network  and  software  server  (a  technical 
assistant was present in the classroom to solve this kind of incidents). Problems also 
occurred with software tools and their different versions. It was also observed that at 
the beginning of the class some students had difficulties to turn on the Tablet PC or 
manage  the  stylus-pen,  due  to  simple  lack  of  knowledge  (this  problem  was  easily 
solved).  Importantly,  some  students  became  distracted  with  the  technology  and  engaged 
in Internet searching, chatting, playing or e-mailing, but after several sessions 
this distraction diminished. 

The students highlighted, as a positive factor, the possibility to solve problems during 
classes. They considered the use of Tablet PCs helped to make the lectures more 
active  and  interesting.  However,  they  also  identified  limitations  in  the  problemsolving 
process because not all of the students counted with one of these devices.  

Most of the students agreed that the use of technology motivated them. It is also 
important to note that in both courses there were no students considering Tablet PCs 
as an inhibitor factor; however they recognized that some training is required to take 
advantage of these devices features. They considered that  Tablet PCs facilitated the 
discussions and the group work during lectures. 

5   Discussion 

At  the  moment,  the  use  of  Tablet  PCs  in  computer  science  courses  seems  to  have 
positive  effects.  However,  there  is  not  a  comprehensive  and  scientific  study  that 

 

Using Tablet PCs and Pen-Based Technologies to Support Engineering Education 

37 

shows which are the real benefits of including this kind of technology in our courses. 
Although using  mobile computing devices during lectures  brings  several benefits, it 
does not seem to be consequence of using just Tablet PCs. Our experiments have also 
identified  that  computing  devices  can  become  a  distracter  factor  during  lectures,  if 
there is not a clear role assigned to them.   

These  experiments  also  have  shown  that  the  use  of  Tablet  PCs  motivates  to  students 
and professors, however it is not clear if the use of laptops generates the same 
effect. Provided the courses involved in the experiments tried to take advantage of the 
Tablet PCs features, and following  the recommendations  of other researchers  in the 
area,  we  redesigned  their  teaching-learning  process.  Now  these  courses  are  more 
active and there is more interactive work during the lectures, which produced a positive 
impact among the participants. However this result seems to be a consequence of 
the redesign process more than the inclusion of Tablet PCs.  

The experiences help us to identify that  not all of the Tablet PCs provide an adequate 
support for these activities, and the mix of technology and paper-based work is 
not a good combination; particularly, if students have to use paper notebooks because 
there are not enough computers for everybody. Although the students recognized the 
importance  of  Tablet  PCs  for  taking  notes  and  facilitating  group  work,  the  use  of 
these devices requires a training process. 

Instructors  were  happy  when using Tablet PCs. They think these devices  help to 
improve  the  quality  of  the  lectures;  however  they  are  not  able  to  replace  the 
black/whiteboard.  In  one  of  the  experiences,  a  lack  of  the  instructor  mobility  was 
identified because of the use of Tablet PC to deliver the lecture. Such problem  was 
then solved using additional software technology. 

6   Conclusions and Future Work 

The use of Tablet PCs in engineering education seems to be growing more and more every 
day. Several researchers have reported experiences of the Tablet PCs adoption, mainly in 
USA. They have identified a list of benefits derived from the use of these devices. 

In order to try to understand the impact of this type of computers t on engineering 
education in Chile, two experiences were conducted at two traditional Chilean universities.
  The  obtained  results  show  some  similarity  with  those  obtained  in  American 
Universities. However there are others that are a bit different. The lack of resources 
for every student opens new challenges for the adoption of these technologies in developing 
countries. 

The experiments have also shown that several benefits associated to the Tablet PCs 
adoption  are  more  a  consequence  of  others  activities  around  this  situation.  At  the 
moment it is not clear which benefits are the direct consequences of the Tablet PCs 
adoption, however the balance seems to be positive. More experimentation and scientific 
work is required to understand its impact of this emerging technology.  

Acknowledgements 

This work was partially supported by Fondecyt (Chile), grant Nº 11060467 and also by 
Hewlett Packard through the Technology for Teaching Higher Education Grant Initiative. 

38 

I. Casas, S.F. Ochoa, and J. Puente 

References 

1.  Alvarado,  C.,  Anderson,  R.,  Prey,  J.,  Simon,  B.,  Tront,  J.,  Wolfman,  S.,  Tablet,  P.C.: 
Computing Curriculum. In: Summary of the Tablet PC and Computing Curriculum Workshop,
 Seattle, USA, August 4 (2004) 

2.  Anderson, R., Davis, P., Linnell, N., Prince, C., Razmov, V., Videon, F.: Classroom Pre-
senter:  Enhancing  Interactive  Education  with  Digital  Ink.  IEEE  Computer 9(40),  56–61 
(2007) 

3.  Berque, D., Bonebright, T., Dart, J., Koch, Z., O’Banion, S.: Using DyKnow Software to 
Support Group Work: A Mixed-Method Evaluation. In: Prey, Reed, Berque (eds.) The Impact 
of Tablet PCs and Pen-based Technology on Education, pp. 11–20. Purdue University 
Press (2007) 

4.  Davis, K.M., Kelly, M., Malani, R., Griswold, W.G., Simon, B.: Preliminary Evaluation of 
NoteBlogger: Public Note Taking in the Classroom. In: Prey, Reed, Berque (eds.) The Impact 
of Tablet PCs and Pen-based Technology on Education, pp. 33–42. Purdue University 
Press (2007) 

5.  Herrera, O., Ochoa, S., Neyem, A., Betti, M., Fuller, D., Aldunate, R.: Mobile Portfolio to 
Support Communities of Practice in Science Education. In: Proceedings of  HCI International 
2007, Beijing, China (July 2007) 

6.  Huettel,  L.G.,  Forbes,  J.,  Franzoni,  L.,  Malkin,  R.,  Nadeau,  J.,  Nightingale,  K.,  Ybarra, 
G.A.: Transcending the traditional: Using tablet PCs to enhance engineering and computer 
science instruction. In: Frontiers in education conference (FIE 2007) (2007) 

7.  Bartels Media GmbH. MaxiVista (Last visit, December 2008), 

http://www.maxivista.com/ 

8.  Nguyen,  H.,  Bilen,  S.,  Devon,  R.,  Wise,  J.:  Adopting  Tablet  PCs  in  Design  Education: 
Student  Use  of  Tablet  PCs  and  Lessons  Learned.  In:  Richards,  G.  (ed.)  Proceedings  of 
World Conference on E-Learning in Corporate, Government, Healthcare, and Higher Education 
2007, pp. 1172–1177. AACE, Chesapeake (2007) 

9.  Ochoa, S., Neyem, A., Bravo, G., Ormeño, E.: : MOCET: a MObile Collaborative Examination 
Tool. In: Proc. of HCII 2007, Beijing, China (July 2007) 

10.  Microsoft  Corp.  OneNote  (2007),  http://office.microsoft.com/es-es/ 

onenote/FX100487703082.aspx (Last visit December 15, 2008)  

11.  Prey, C., Reed, R.H., Berque, D.A. (eds.): The impact of Tablet PCs and Pen-based Technology 
on Education. Purdue University Press (2007) 

12.  Prey, C., Weaver, A.: Tablet PC Technology: The Next Generation. IEEE Computer 9(40), 

32–33 (2007) 

13.  Price, E., Simon, B.: A Survey to Assess the Impact of Tablet PC-based Active Learning: 
Preliminary  Report  and  Lessons  Learned.  In:  Prey,  Reed,  Berque  (eds.)  The  Impact  of 
Tablet PCs and Pen-based Technology on Education, pp. 97–105. Purdue University Press 
(2007) 

14.  Sommerich, C., Collura, K.: Learning with Mobile Technology in high School: A HumanFactors 
 Perspective.  In:  Prey,  Reed,  Berque  (eds.)  The  Impact  of  Tablet  PCs  and  Penbased 
Technology on Education, pp. 127–136. Purdue University Press (2007) 

15.  Toto, R., Lim, K., Wise, J.: Supporting Innovation: The Diffusion and Adoption of Tablet 
PCs in College of Engineering. In: Prey, Reed, Berque (eds.) The Impact of  Tablet PCs 
and Pen-based Technology on Education, pp. 147–155. Purdue University Press (2007) 

16.  Tront, J.G.: Facilitating Pedagogical Practices through a Large-Scale Tablet PC Development.
 IEEE Computer 9(40), 62–68 (2007) 

