Wireless Pers Commun (2017) 97:2207–2228
DOI 10.1007/s11277-017-4604-6

A Stochastic Approach for Modeling Message
Dissemination in Opportunistic Networks

Javier Orozco1
Roc Meseguer3

• Rodrigo Santos1

• Sergio F. Ochoa2

•

Published online: 23 June 2017
Ó Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2017

Abstract The opportunistic networks have shown to be an interesting communication
infrastructure for supporting mobile collaborative systems in several application scenarios
like disaster relief efforts, hospital work and tourism. The message delivery strategies used
in these networks affect in different ways the performance and energy consumption of
these systems. Therefore, it is important to understand the message dissemination process
in opportunistic networks to envision the impact that it will have on mobile collaborative
systems. Most approaches used to study the message dissemination in these networks use
simulations or empirical tests. Although useful, the ﬁrst one requires an important modeling 
effort, and the second one involves high design and experimentation costs. This limits
our capability to evaluate alternatives for message dissemination and choose the most
appropriate one according to the features of the application scenario. In order to help
address this limitation, we propose a stochastic approach for modeling message dissemination 
in opportunistic networks. This approach involves a low modeling and usage effort
that allows designers not only to compare several dissemination strategies, but also design
particular ones using an iterative process. The usability and usefulness of this approach is
illustrated through the modeling and analysis of the dissemination process of two well-

& Rodrigo Santos

ierms@criba.edu.ar

Javier Orozco
ieorozco@criba.edu.ar

Sergio F. Ochoa
sochoa@dcc.uchile.cl

Roc Meseguer
meseguer@ac.upc.edu

1

2

Electrical Engineering and Computers Department, Universidad Nacional del Sur, Bahı´a Blanca,
Argentina

Computer Science Department, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile

3 Department of Computer Architecture, Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya - BarcelonaTech,

Barcelona, Spain

123

2208

J. Orozco et al.

known message routing strategies. Although the results are still preliminary, they show the
feasibility of using this proposal, and opens several opportunities for studying these networks 
and improving the mobile applications that use them.
Keywords Opportunistic networks  Message dissemination  Dissemination
cost  Modeling approach  Analytical model

1 Introduction

The widespread adoption of mobile devices with several wireless communication capacities 
has changed the way in which people interact with other people, the environment and
remote resources. Several mobile and ubiquitous applications running on these devices use
opportunistic networks (oppnets) to support the activities of mobile users; for instance,
ﬁreﬁghters performing search and rescue activities [16, 19, 23], nurses and physicians
doing hospital work [5] or tourists looking for attractions when visiting a new place [20].
The oppnets are mobile peer-to-peer networks that combine the capabilities from both,
mobile ad hoc and delay tolerant networks. In these networks the communication opportunities 
are intermittent, therefore an end-to-end path between the source and the destination 
may never exist. The modeling of the message dissemination process allows
software designers to envision the impact of such a process on the performance and energy
consumption of mobile applications, and thus determining the best option to deliver
messages before writing code.

Provided these applications are usually intensive in terms of message exchange, the
designers have to deal with the trade-off between energy consumption and message dissemination 
speed. Typically, the higher the dissemination speed the higher the amount of
resources required in such a process; particularly energy. Therefore, the analysis for
determining the best message dissemination strategy requires to consider these two aspects.
Most approaches used to study the message dissemination in oppnets involve simulations 
or empirical experiments, which have shown to be useful, but also impose some
restrictions that limits our capability to understand this process and envision its impact on
the applications that use it. Particularly, the simulations involve an important effort to
implement and validate each simulated scenario. Moreover, the cost of tuning the models
used in the simulations is also considerable, which jeopardizes the possibility to design
particular dissemination strategies in an iterative way; i.e., improving the models based on
the previous results.

Concerning the empirical tests, they provide accurate results, but involve important
efforts for designing and running the experiments. The feasibility to use this approach
decreases when increases the number of participants. Moreover, the empirical tests are
difﬁcult to replicate, which limits our capability to perform an iterative design process.

Contrarily, the modeling of message dissemination in oppnets requires that designers
can iteratively tune the network and process features to address the trade-off between
dissemination speed and energy consumption. Therefore, these modeling approaches limit
the capability to perform this interactive design, and compare the dissemination
alternatives.

By trying to contribute addressing this limitation, we present a stochastic approach to
model the message dissemination in oppnets. The proposal involves a modeling and usage

123

A Stochastic Approach for Modeling Message Dissemination in...

2209

effort that is considerable minor than performing simulations or empirical experiments, and
it allows designers to perform an interactive modeling. This approach uses the Markov
Chain theory to represent the dissemination process, and thus it produces an analytical
propagation model of an oppnet. Each model represents a particular dissemination strategy
that could be tuned or compared with other strategies involving a small effort. Once
created and validated the model of a particular dissemination strategy, it can be reused not
only by designers of mobile applications, but also by researchers as an instrument that
helps them study these networks.

In order to illustrate the usability and usefulness of this approach, two well-known
routing strategies were modeled and their performance in various scenarios were calculated
using the analytical process, and considering message dissemination speed and energy
consumption. This validation process shows not only the feasibility to use this proposal,
but also the advantages that using it has in terms of modeling effort and ﬂexibility.
Recognizing that the communication scenarios used in this work are not enough to generalize 
the results and more evaluation is required, the current outcomes are highly
encouraging and open several opportunities for studying these networks in a more simple
and interactive way.

Next section presents and discusses the related work. Section 3 presents the proposed
modeling approach for representing the message dissemination and energy consumption in
oppnets. Section 4 illustrates the usability of the proposal by instantiating the network
model to capture its behavior when an epidemic or a spray-and-wait routing strategy is
used for the message dissemination. Section 5 presents and discusses the evaluation results,
as a way to show the usefulness of this proposal. Finally, Sect. 7 presents the conclusions
and the future work.

2 Related Work

Some recent works raise different considerations on the way in which the intermeeting
time between nodes (for message passing) can be modeled in opportunistic networks. In
particular several stochastic distributions are analyzed and compared with data obtained
empirically in real scenarios. The use of random walk distributions with exponential
meeting times is considered a suitable model for independent nodes moving in close areas,
while power-law distributions are used in open areas [3, 17, 24].

In [12] and [29] the authors analyze different alternatives of epidemic routing to
improve the overall performance of a mobile ad hoc network. They use a Markov model to
represent the message propagation and a Markov Chain model to describe the evolution of
the system over time. However, this proposal is based on the probability density function,
which is speciﬁc for the conﬁgurations used in their studies.

In [21] the use of an opportunistic network is analyzed as communication support of a
mobile collaborative application, and the ﬁrst concepts of time constraints are introduced.
In [22] there is an analysis of real-time message trafﬁc for the case of FIFO scheduling at
the gateway without priorities.

In [13] the Opportunistic Network Environment simulator is introduced. This tool was
designed for evaluating routing and application protocols on these networks. The simulator
provides a framework for implementing routing and application protocols based on different 
network interfaces, for example Bluetooth or Wi-Fi.

123

2210

J. Orozco et al.

Concerning the strategies reported in the literature to evaluate the behavior of Delay
Tolerant Networks (DTNs), they are mainly based on simulations or empirical studies. In
[11] various of these strategies are presented and discussed. As mentioned before, they are
time consuming and have low ﬂexibility to explore the message dissemination in an
iterative way. Therefore, an analytic approach would be recommended to address this
challenge.

Several papers report analytic studies of oppnets and DTNs. In [30], a model of epidemic 
routing is introduced based on ordinary differential equations derived as limits of
Markovian models. The proposal calculates the expected delay and the number of message
copies (i.e., resources limitations), but it does not consider the energy consumption
involved in the dissemination process.

An analytical model, also based on Markov chains, was proposed in [2] for evaluating a
single copy forwarding strategy that follows an opportunistic social-aware dissemination.
The model considers the number of hops needed for a message to reach the destination, and
also the expected transmission delay. The nodes mobility follows a social behavior, i.e.,
some users may cluster and move together, and others may never get in touch with each
other. Although this proposal is interesting, it does not analyze the energy consumption
involved in the message transmission.

Similarly, Spyropoulos et al. introduce an analytical model to determine the expected
number of hops and the expected delay of the messages when they are delivered in an
opportunistic social-aware fashion [25]. As in the previous works, the model is based on
human behavior and there is no evaluation of the energy consumption of the network. This
proposal is evaluated using synthetic and real mobility traces.

In [1] the authors introduce a Markov model to represent the data-dissemination in
is used to determine convergence towards stationary

stationary regimes. The model
regimes instead of evaluating the network performance.

Whitbeck et al. propose a model for Epidemic propagation on edge-Markovian dynamic
graphs, which capture the correlation between successive connectivity graphs [27]. This
proposal analyzes the impact of the bundle size and node mobility in the propagation delay.
In [10] the authors studied the performance of message propagation in people-centric
opportunistic networks using Random Way Point and Random Direction mobility models.
Unfortunately few proposals address the modeling of energy consumption in oppnets and
DTNs. In this sense, Wang et al. [26] model the contact and inter-contact time, and validate
the model with real traces. Using this information they evaluate the trade-off between the
energy consumed in the search for neighbors, the probability of ﬁnding them and the
frequency with which the process is performed. However, this energy analysis does not
consider the whole transmission process.

In [28] the authors analyzed the message response time considering energy consumption
restrictions related to the transmission range and sojourn time of the message in the nodes.
The message propagation model used in this work is different to the one we are proposing,
therefore it is not possible to compare both approaches.

Neglia and Zhang present a ﬁrst attempt to study analytically the trade-off between
delivery delay and resource consumption for epidemic routing in DTNs [18]. The authors
computed both, the average number of message copies and the average delay in the
transmission. The energy analysis left out the device discovery protocol, which is relevant
in oppnets.

These previous works show that the stated problem is still open. In order to help address
it, the next section describes the analytical approach proposed for modeling the message
dissemination in oppnets. This approach introduces a Continuous Time Markov Chain

123

A Stochastic Approach for Modeling Message Dissemination in...

2211

(CTMC) analysis to determine the process performance, which is obtained by solving a set
of differential equations using the tools provided by Markov calculus. Particularly,
mathematical software tools, like Octave or Matlab, or even by hand solving the Laplace
Transform of the differential equations. Moreover, this proposal also models the energy
consumption of the whole transmission process.

3 The Stochastic Modeling Approach

The performance of the oppnet depends on several factors, such as the nodes mobility, the
size of the application area, the communication range and the number of network nodes.
Modeling the message dissemination in oppnets is complex since it requires to consider
these factors and the relationships among them. The network behavior would also be
affected by the particular layout of the physical area where the oppnet is deployed. All
these factors determine the inter-meeting time probability distribution of nodes. As messages 
are assumed to be exchanged completely when two nodes meet, the message
propagation is tied to the inter-meeting time distribution.

Considering several previous works, we assume a random walk distribution for the
nodes mobility, which produces an exponential distribution in the inter-meeting times
[4, 6, 14]. Based on this assumption, the message transmission can be modeled as a
renewal process with Poisson distribution, characterized by a unique parameter k that
measures the nodes encounters rate. In what follows, we model the message dissemination
and the energy consumption based on the previous assumption. These models can be
instantiated to address speciﬁc communication scenarios reusing thus the knowledge
embedded on them.

3.1 Message Transmission Model

The message transmission follows a birth process that can be modeled as a CTMC. This is
a mathematical approach widely used to study different communication models where
sojourn times, in the different states, have an exponential distribution with the well-known
memoryless property (related to the Markov processes). Each state in the CTMC represents
the number of message copies present in the network. The Markov chain has a source node
and also a destination one that is represented by an absorbing state. Figure 1 shows a
schematic model for a six nodes network that use the classic epidemic routing strategy for
message dissemination, i.e., every node holding the message is able to pass it on to other
node, whether or not is the destination.

The source node is represented as the ﬁrst state in the Markov chain. In this case, the
source node may pass the message to any of the other ﬁve nodes in the network, one of
them being the destination one (i.e., the absorbing state). When the message is transmitted
to the second node in the chain, there are two copies and still four nodes to reach. In this
case the transition probability is doubled. With the third copy, there are three nodes with
possibilities of meeting the fourth node, and three nodes left without the message in the
network. When the fourth copy has been transmitted, the transition probability is reduced,

Fig. 1 Markov chain model for an oppnet of six nodes

123

2212

J. Orozco et al.

because even if there are four nodes with probability of copying the message, only two
nodes are left without a copy. At the end of this process, there will be ﬁve nodes with a
message copy, and only one node lefts without it.

Three metrics are used to understand the message dissemination process: the mean time
to absorption (MTTA) that reﬂects the average message delay, the number of message
copies present in the network (mc) at the absorption time, and the average energy consumed 
(Em).

The MTTA is used to determine how long a message should be alive consuming memory
and energy in the nodes while it tries to reach the destination node. Provided that the
behavior of the network is stochastic, it is possible to set a certain period of time in which
there is a high probability that the message is delivered to the destination node. The (mc)
represents the amount of resources used for the message transmission, which is also related
to the energy consumption involved in such a process (Em). With the ﬁrst two parameters it
is possible to conﬁgure the lifetime of the messages allowing them to be eliminated once
this time is elapsed. The third parameter is useful for evaluating the energy propagation
cost of the transmission process.

The CTMC described before constitutes a stochastic process. In order to compute the
MTTA and mc, it is necessary to calculate the probability density function for each state in
the CTMC, by using the differential equations that describe the chain stochastic behavior:
ð3:1Þ
In this equation, p is a vector where each element pi is the probability density function for
state i, and Q is the transition matrix. This matrix is built from the Markov chain and it
represents the transitions among all the states in the chain. The variable qij represents the
rate at which the process may move from state i to state j, where qii is the sum of all the
transitions rates.

_p ¼ pQ

The set of linear differential equations presented in (3.1) can be solved in several ways.
In particular, the analytical solution can be reached using the Laplace Transform (LT).
However, the LT solution may have numerical problems for a relatively small number of
network nodes. In order to avoid this, the differential equations can be solved using
numerical solutions like the one proposed by the ODE45 algorithm [15]. The next equation
computes mc:

mcðtÞ ¼

ipiðtÞ

ð3:2Þ

X

N

i¼1

The expected transmission delay from the source node to destination one is computed by
analyzing the behavior of the CTMC. The destination node acts as an absorbing state. In
fact, once the message gets into the destination node, such a node will no longer propagate
the message.

The previous CTMC is redrawn in Fig. 2 to show the transitions to the absorbing state.
Even if the message has reached the destination node, it may continue propagating copies
to other nodes until all of them have a copy of the message.

The MTTA is obtained from the cumulative distribution function (cdf) that is calculated
by excluding the absorbing node from the Markov chain. The modiﬁed transition matrix is

b
Q. The cumulative distribution function for each state is computed by solving

denoted as
the following set of equations:

123

A Stochastic Approach for Modeling Message Dissemination in...

2213

Fig. 2 CTMC with absorbing state

b
Q þ pð0Þ

_LðtÞ ¼ LðtÞ

ð3:3Þ
The time spent before absorption can be calculated by taking the limit limt!1LðtÞ. As the
equations are restricted to the non-absorbing states, the limit can be applied on both sides
of (3.3) to obtain the following set of linear equations:
b
Q ¼   pð0Þ
X

Lð1Þ

ð3:4Þ

MTTA ¼

Lið1Þ

ð3:5Þ

N

i¼1

By replacing t with the solution of (3.5) in (3.2) it is possible to compute mc. Once
determined the number of message copies present in the network (mc) and the average
message delay (MTTA), we can calculate the energy consumption in this message dissemination 
process.

3.2 Energy Consumption Model

The participation in an oppnet implies the users must spend part of their device energy to
transport messages of other people. How much energy a certain routing strategy will
demand in the network is a key question for estimating the cost of the message dissemination 
process. Based on several previous works [8, 9, 26] we introduce a model to
represent the energy consumption of the network, during an end-to-end message transmission.
 The model has four terms (3.6):

Em ¼ Emt þ Emr þ Edd þ Eidle

ð3:6Þ

where Emt is the energy consumed by the oppnet during the message transmission and Emr
represents the consumption due message reception. Edd is the consumption during the
device discovery process and Eidle is the energy consumption when the devices are idle.
Equation (3.7) expresses the energy consumption during the message transmission. This
consumption depends on both, the message length [9] and the kind of devices involved in
the process [8, 9]. For simplicity, in this analysis it is assumed that the message length is
constant and the energy consumption is assumed to be the mean value among all devices
(Dt). MT is the number of messages that are transmitted during the period that is being
evaluated.

Emt ¼ DtMT

ð3:7Þ

123

2214

J. Orozco et al.

Equation (3.8) expresses the energy consumption during the reception of a message. It is
assumed that a message is not broadcasted, but sent from one node to another one.
However, it is impossible to avoid that other neighbor nodes listen the message; therefore,
those nodes will discard the message after reading the header (i.e., after verifying the target
node). For this reason, c represents this extra consumption, which is calculated for each
particular case. In this proposal it is assumed that there is a 15% extra consumption due the
header processing during the message reception.

ð3:8Þ
As in the previous case, Dr represents the energy consumption during reception and MT is
the number of messages that are transmitted.

Emr ¼ Drð1 þ cÞMT

Equation (3.9) represents the energy consumed during the device discovery process.
This operation must be done periodically and discover as much neighbors as possible. If a
node fails in the detection of a neighbor and that neighbor is the destination node, then the
message transmission will be unnecessary delayed.

On the other hand, a node cannot be continuously scanning for other nodes as the
battery would be exhausted in a short time. The period Tdd represents the trade-off between
the energy consumption and the probability of detecting new neighbors. As a rule of
thumb, it can be set to be ﬁve times the rate of the inter-meeting times. b is a parameter that
represents the energy consumption in the node during the device discovery process.

ð3:9Þ

Edd ¼ bN

X

ðtn   tn 1Þ

n

Tdd

Finally, Eq. (3.10) computes the energy consumed by the nodes during the idle intervals.
In that equation, a is the mean power demand while the device is idle, N is the number of
nodes in the network and ðtn   tn 1Þ is the time elapsed between two consecutive states
(i.e., since the last successful transmission).
Eidle ¼ aN

ðtn   tn 1Þ

ð3:10Þ

X

n

The complete expression for the energy consumption is then obtained from Eqs. 3.7, 3.8,
3.9, and 3.10. The Eq. (3.11) computes the energy consumption during a message
propagation.

X

Em ¼ DtMT þ Drð1 þ cÞMT þ Nða

X

þ b

ðtn   tn 1Þ=TddÞ

n

ðtn   tn 1Þ

n

ð3:11Þ

For comparing the energy consumption among different message propagation strategies, it
is interesting to consider the consumption in a relative way. Basically, it is assumed that
the network has, before starting the transmission, a certain amount of energy that is
computed as the energy stored in each node. For the sake of simplicity, let us say that the
initial energy Einit ¼ NEc, that is the number of network nodes by the initial energy in each
node. Equation (3.12) computes the percentage of residual energy left in the network after
a message has been transmitted.

123

A Stochastic Approach for Modeling Message Dissemination in...

Eres ¼ 100

Einit   Em

Einit

2215

ð3:12Þ

The evaluation of the energy consumption in terms of Joules is not signiﬁcant as there are
many different devices and batteries. The literature reports that even for different devices
and communication protocols, the consumption of an idle device is between 20% and 30%
of the node consumption while transmitting/receiving a message [7, 26]. In this work we
assume such a consumption as 25%. The consumption of the device discovery process is
almost identical to a message transfer; therefore, it is assumed as 90%.

This model considers the use of a single communication protocol in the message
transmission process, however, it can be extended to support several alternatives. In order
to do that, the discovery process energy consumption requires to perform the scanning of
several radio antennas. While the energy consumption during transmission and reception is
almost the same, the device discovery process consumes proportionally more then that,
since the scanning process is performed for each protocol.

Another important aspect to consider is the time period required to transfer a message
from source to destination node. Using a Markov chain it is possible to determine not only
the Mean Time To Absorption (MTTA), but also the time necessary to achieve a 90%
probability of successful delivery. The energy evaluation is done over that time interval.

4 Model Instantiation

The analytical model presented in the previous section should be instantiated according to
the message dissemination strategy to be used. In order to illustrate the model instantiation
process, we have considered the Epidemic and Spray and Wait routing strategies.

When an Epidemic dissemination is used, the Markov chain always has a symmetric
construction. Therefore, general rules can be applied to compute the different transition
rates between states based on the number of network nodes.

In case of Spray and Wait, the construction of the model is particular for each pair
(C, H). In many cases, the number of possible states to be considered could increase, as
several combinations of messages copies can be present in the network. This feature limits
the possibility of computing, in a generic way, the model for this routing strategy. Next we
explain how to perform the instantiation of the analytical model for these routing
strategies.

4.1 Modeling Epidemic Routing

Epidemic routing regularly uses the maximum amount of resources available in the network.
As mentioned before, each node receiving the message becomes a ‘‘vector’’ capable of
propagating it to other network nodes. In this way, a copy of the message may be present in
every node using an important amount of memory and bandwidth. Provided that the Markov
chain is symmetric, its transition matrix can be expressed through the following equation:

8i; j ¼ 1; 2; . . .; N Qij ¼

8
><
>:

jðN   jÞ
 jðN   jÞ
0

j ¼ i þ 1
j ¼ i
otherwise

ð4:1Þ

123

2216

J. Orozco et al.

In particular, the Eq. (4.2) shows the general form (for the Laplace Transform - LT) of
each state k, for a network of N nodes that uses Epidemic routing. The transient probability
function can be obtained from the Inverse Laplace Transform (LT 1).

p1ðsÞ ¼ 1

pkðsÞ ¼

s þ Nk
Y
Y

k 1
j¼1

jðN   jÞk

ðs þ ðjðN   jÞ þ jÞkÞ

k
j¼1

k  2

ð4:2Þ

As mentioned before, the solution for each particular state of the Markov chain can be
found with the help of a solver like Matlab, or by hand using the regular Inverse Laplace
Transform tables. These analytical methods are not suitable for addressing medium-size to
large networks (i.e., oppnets with more than 20 nodes); therefore, in these cases we
recommend the use of a numerical approximation, e.g., based on ODE45 [15].

For computing the MTTA in an oppnet that uses Epidemic routing, it is necessary to

b
Q is obtained from:

reformulate the Markov chain as shown in Fig. 2. Then, the
jðN   1   jÞ
 jðN   jÞ

8i; j ¼ 1; 2; . . .; N   1

b
Qij ¼

8
><
>:

j ¼ i þ 1
j ¼ i

The cfd for each state is obtained from Eq. (3.4) and it is given by the following:

0

otherwise

L1ð1Þ ¼ 1
Nk
Y

Lkð1Þ ¼

Y
ðjðN   jÞ þ jÞkÞ k  2

jðN   jÞk

k 1
j¼1

k
j¼1

From Eq. (4.4) it is possible to compute the MTTA.
X

MTTA ¼ 1
Nk

N

i¼1

1
i

ð4:3Þ

ð4:4Þ

ð4:5Þ

The expected number of copies can be computed from (3.2) for this routing strategy. As
there is no general expression for the piðtÞ, the solution to (3.2) depends on the number of
nodes in the network. Then, the energy consumed in the network is a function of the
amount of copies present at the moment of absorption.

4.2 Modeling Spray and Wait Routing

This message dissemination strategy limits the number of copies in the network and
involves two phases. In the ﬁrst one, the message is delivered from the source node to a
limited number of intermediate nodes. In the second phase, these nodes are in charge of
transmitting the message to the destination one. In this strategy, two parameters deﬁne how
the messages are propagated in the network. The ﬁrst one is the number of allowed copies
(C) that determines the bandwidth required for the transmissions. The second one is the
number of hops (H) allowed for the message to reach the destination node. It deﬁnes how
many nodes can propagate the message.

123

A Stochastic Approach for Modeling Message Dissemination in...

2217

The parameters C and H can be used to set several dissemination conditions in the
network. At the moment the message is ready to be transmitted by the source node, it has
the capacity of delivering C copies of the message. The way in which these copies are
distributed depends on the number of hops allowed. Each time the source or intermediate
nodes can pass as much as H   j   1 messages to the next node, where j is the amount of
hops already taken. This approach is completely different from the Epidemic strategy, in
which transmitting the message to another node does not reduce the capacity of transferring 
it to another node later.

Figure 3 shows an example of a Binary Spray and Wait message propagation. In this
case, when the source node meets an intermediate node, it passes half of the copies it has,
and each intermediate node does the same. For this to occur, it is required that H ¼ bC=2c
and H [ 2. Figure 3 shows one possible path for delivering the message to the destination
node. The complete Markov Chain for this case contains many more states, as there are
different possible combinations with the same number of copies in the network.

Next subsections show the message transmission process using several combinations of
C and H as a way to illustrate how several dissemination conditions can be set in this
model. Although these parameters are interdependent, by increasing one of them does not
ensures the improvement of the network performance. For instance, given a certain value
for H, incrementing C improves the network performance since more nodes will be able to
transmit the message once they receive a copy. However, given a value of C, incrementing
H does not improve the performance in every case. As it will be shown in the next
subsections, the network performance for H ¼ 2 and H ¼ 4 is identical when C ¼ 4, but it
is marginally better when H ¼ 3.

4.2.1 Two Hops Allowed
Using this conﬁguration (H ¼ 2), the message can go through only one intermediate node
that will eventually pass it to the destination node. The source node distributes C copies to
an identical amount of intermediate nodes. Figure 4 shows the way in which the message is
distributed for the case of four copies (C ¼ 4). The size of the network (N) deﬁnes the
transition rates, but the amount of states in the CTMC is independent of the network size.
The chain will have C þ 1 states in every case. When the message has been copied to C
intermediate nodes, it will have a constant ratio of Ck to reach the destination node. This
particular case is regular and the transition rates can be expressed in general terms as a
function of N and C.

The Q matrix is built in the following way:

Fig. 3 Spray and Wait example for C = 8 and H = 4

Fig. 4 Spray and Wait model for C = 4 and H = 2

123

2218

The reduced
state.

8i; j 2 f1; C þ 1g Qij ¼

8

>>>>>><
>>>>>>:

 ðN   1Þ
ðN   1Þ
 C
C

j ¼ i & i\C
j ¼ i þ 1 & i\C
j ¼ i & i ¼ C
j ¼ i þ 1 & i ¼ C
otherwise

J. Orozco et al.

ð4:6Þ

b
Q matrix can be obtained redrawing the CTMC and eliminating the absorbing

0

8i; j 2 f1; Cg

b
Qij ¼

8
>>><
>>>:

 ðN   1Þ
ðN   i   1Þ
 C
0

j ¼ i&i\C
j ¼ i þ 1&i\C
j ¼ i&i ¼ C
otherwise

ð4:7Þ

4.2.2 Three Hops Allowed
In this case (H ¼ 3), the source node transfers to the intermediate ones two copies of the
message. These nodes can transfer one of these copies to other nodes, and eventually the
message arrives to the destination node. The number of copies allowed in the system
should be at least three. With three or four copies, the propagation model is similar to the
case of H ¼ 2, as there is only one possible network state for each distribution of copies in
the nodes. With C  4, there is more than one state having the same amount of copies in the
system. Figure 5 shows a transmission example for C ¼ 6, where two possible states can
be assumed involving the three message copies in the system.

The matrix Q has no general form since the amount of additional states, representing the
same amount of copies in the network, depends on the maximum allowed number of
copies.

The second state in the CTMC has the following distribution of copies. One node has
four copies while the other has only two copies. The chain can progress in two different
directions. The node holding four copies may ﬁnd another node and pass it two copies of
the message. In this case, there will be three nodes, each one holding two copies. However,
if the nodes holding two copies meet another node, then the chain evolves towards other
combination with one node holding four copies and two nodes holding only one. It is clear
that both paths have exactly the same probability. In the second state both nodes holding
copies of the message have the same probability of ﬁnding another node. This is the reason
why we divide the output rate from the second state, for the states representing three
different nodes holding copies of the message in equal parts ðN   2Þ. In these cases, there

Fig. 5 Spray and Wait model for C = 6 and H = 3

123

A Stochastic Approach for Modeling Message Dissemination in...

2219

are more states in the CTMC than copies of the message in the network. Thus, for the
computation of mc, the amount of copies related to each state should be considered. For
instance, when C ¼ 6 and H ¼ 3 the following instantiation should done:
mcðtÞ ¼ p1ðMTTAÞ þ 2p2ðMTTAÞ þ 3p3ðMTTAÞ þ 3p4ðMTTAÞ

ð4:8Þ

þ 4p5ðMTTAÞ þ 5p6ðMTTAÞ þ 6p7ðMTTAÞ

4.2.3 Four Hops Allowed
In this case (H ¼ 4), the minimum C is four. The source node propagates two copies to
intermediate nodes and keeps a copy for the case of meeting the destination one. Intermediate 
nodes propagate one copy to another intermediate one and keep one for the case of
reaching the destination node.

In Fig. 6, the CTMC for seven copies is shown. The results in the second state indicate
that the source node has four copies while there is only one intermediate node with three
copies. At this point, like in the case of H ¼ 3, there are two possible paths. In the ﬁrst one,
the intermediate node meets another node and transfers two copies, resulting in a distribution 
of four, two and one copies for the source, ﬁrst intermediate and second intermediate 
nodes respectively. In the second path, the source node meets another node and
transfers three copies of the message, keeping just one for itself. The distribution in this
case is three and one copy for the intermediate and source nodes respectively.

In the third state the situation is repeated. There are three nodes with message copies,
but only two of them can propagate it to other intermediate nodes. Again, it may happen
that the source node meets another one and in that situation it transfers three copies,
keeping one for itself. After this, there will be two nodes with one copy, one node with two
copies and one node with three copies. The other path is followed if the intermediate node
holding two copies meets another one. In that case, it transfers one copy and keeps the
other one for itself, resulting in a distribution of one node with four copies and three nodes
with one copy each.

The fourth state can only progress to the sixth one with a distribution of two nodes with
one copy, one node with two copies and one node with three copies. In the sixth state there
are again two possible paths. In the ﬁrst one, the node with three copies meets another one
and transfers two copies, keeping one for itself. After this, the distribution will be two
nodes with two copies, and three nodes with one copy. The other path is followed when the
node with two copies meets another one and transfers one copy. In that case the distribution 
is one node with three copies, and four nodes with one copy each.

As it can be seen in Fig. 6, the states representing three, four and ﬁve nodes with at least
one copy of the message are duplicated. This has to be considered when building the

b
Q, so the MTTA, mc and Ec can be properly computed.

transition matrix Q and

Fig. 6 Spray and Wait for C = 7 and H = 4

123

2220

J. Orozco et al.

It is important to remark that once built the model, it can be reused, avoiding thus that
software or communication protocol designers have to create it every time that they need to
compare the performance of various dissemination strategies or design a new one. The
model setting process is also simple. This shows that this modeling proposal reduces the
effort required to count on and use the message dissemination model, by comparing it with
effort required when using simulations or empirical tests.

5 Message Delivery Performance Evaluation

In order to illustrate how to use the instantiated model, we evaluate the performance of the
Epidemic and Spray and Wait routing strategies by comparing their MTTA. This was done

b
by computing the CTMC transition matrix Q and
Q for several combinations of the
number of network nodes (N), message copies (C) and hops (H). The differential equations
for each combination were solved using the ODE45 in Octave.

Figure 7 shows the behavior of the MTTA for the message delivery when up to two hops
are used. The MTTA remains almost identical if we use three or four hops. As it can be
seen, reducing the inter-meeting ratio ten times increases the MTTA in the same proportion.
This can be explained by looking at Eq. (4.5). As shown, the inter-meeting rate is just a
scaling factor. For simplicity, in the rest of the performance evaluation we assume k ¼ 1.
The ﬁgure also shows that the Epidemic routing is always the one with the best
throughput for messages; i.e., the one with the shortest delay for delivering messages.
However, this performance requires an important consumption of resources as it will be
shown in Sect. 6. This consumption of resources affects the network during a short time
period, due the message delivery in Epidemic is the faster than in other routing strategies.
The performance analysis shows that the improvement in the transmission delay, when
using a Spray and Wait strategy with a number of allowed copies, tends to saturate the
network. There is a remarkable improvement of performance between the use of four and
eight copies for the message delivery. However, there is a small difference in performance
when we use seven or eight message copies. Actually, the improvement between using
seven and eight copies is smaller than the one obtained from four to ﬁve. This behavior is
similar if we consider two, three or four hops.

Fig. 7 MTTA for H = 2. a k ¼ 1, b k ¼ 0:1

123

A Stochastic Approach for Modeling Message Dissemination in...

2221

The results of the MTTA shown in Fig. 8 considers six copies, but using different
numbers of hops for the message delivery. The cases involving three and four hops (H ¼ 3
and H ¼ 4 respectively) have the best performance. This is because with that combination
the Spray and Wait is binary, i.e., each node transmits to the next one half of its copies.
This shows that the results obtained from the instantiated model are rich enough to
analyze the performance of a certain message delivery strategy, or compare the performance 
of various of them. Moreover, tuning and running the instantiated model is also
simple. This opens several opportunities to perform iterative modeling (or comparisons) of
message delivery strategies.

6 Determining the Number of Copies and the Energy Consumption

Once analyzed the performance of a message delivery strategy, we have to determine the
resources consumed by each routing strategy, particularly memory and energy, according
to the probability of delivering the message to the destination node. The ﬁrst variable (i.e.,
memory) is determined by the number of nodes with a message copy (mc) in the network,
and the second one represents the energy left in the network (Eres).

The probability of a successful transmission can be determined by computing the
probability of reaching the absorbing state after a period of time. Figure 9 shows the
probability of reaching the destination node using different routing strategies, and
according to several MTTA values. These results show that the probability of reaching the
destination node at 2MTTA is over 85% for all routing strategies. Considering this fact, it is
possible to determine the demand of resources, setting the message lifetime to two times
the MTTA.

In all combinations of C and H for Spray and Wait, the expected number of copies in the
network at the moment of absorption tends to C. Instead, in the Epidemic routing, the
expected number of copies in the system is close to the network size. These results indicate
that when using Epidemic routing, almost all nodes will have a copy of the message before
it reaches the destination node.

Figure 10 shows the residual energy present in the network. In the ﬁrst one the device
discovery process is done at two times the meeting rate, while in the second one it is done
at ﬁve times the meeting rate. The results show that the device discovery process consumes
an important amount of energy; therefore, if we use it frequently, we will degrade the
performance of the Spray and Wait (in term of energy consumption). Apparently, the
Epidemic strategy demands more energy since a more important number of parallel

Fig. 8 MTTA for C = 6

123

2222

J. Orozco et al.

Fig. 9 Probability of reaching destination node at different times (expressed as multiples of MTTA).
a Epidemic, b Spray and Wait for H = 2 and C = 6, c Spray and Wait for H = 3 and C = 6, d Spray and
Wait for H = 4 and C = 6

transmissions are allowed. However, this is partially true, because the delivery process is
the shortest, therefore the network is disseminating the messages during a time period that
is shorter than Spray and Wait (until a message copy reaches the destination node).

Contrarily, Spray and Wait consumes fewer resources in each message delivery round,
but it requires more time to reach the destination. Therefore, the device discovery process
is repeated frequently, which makes the energy consumption higher. This situation
becomes explicit in Fig. 10, where Epidemic routing is the most expensive strategy when
we perform two device discovery between every nodes meeting. However, if we increase
to 5 times the device scanning frequency, the energy consumption for Spray and Wait
overcomes the Epidemic.

Figure 11 shows how the discovery process affects the residual energy of the network,
depending on the dissemination strategy that is used. These strategies are ranked from
lower to higher according to their energy consumption, which corresponds to their MTTA;
e.g., Epidemic (that has the shortest MTTA) is the strategy that has the lowest energy
consumption, then follows Spray and Wait with 8 copies, and so on.

123

A Stochastic Approach for Modeling Message Dissemination in...

2223

Fig. 10 Percentage of residual energy after 2 MTTA, considering 2 and 5 instances of device discovery
between every nodes meeting. a Two scanning per meeting and H = 2, b ﬁve scanning per meeting and
H = 2

Fig. 11 Percentage of residual energy due device discovery after 2MTTA, considering 2 and 5 scanning
between each nodes meeting. a Two scanning per meeting and H = 2, b ﬁve scanning per meeting and
H = 2

After evaluating several frequencies for device discovery, we can say that the energy
consumption increases with this frequency. However, the ranking of strategies is remained
in the order shown in Fig. 11.

Figure 12 shows the energy consumption when several messages are sent in a concurrent 
way. In this case, the energy required per message to be transmitted in the Epidemic 
strategy is higher than the energy required by the Spray and Wait with C = 6 and
H = 2. This result is relevant because in an oppnet usually several messages are being
transmitted among the nodes in a concurrent way.

Choosing a strategy for the message dissemination is not easy, since we have to consider 
the required dissemination speed, network autonomy (in terms of energy) and also the
number of nodes that will eventually produce messages for other nodes. For instance, in
applications for public advertisement, where energy consumption is ensured, there is
usually an information producer and several interim nodes replicating the information and
trying to reach the destination. Provided that the producer would like to irradiate as much

123

2224

J. Orozco et al.

Fig. 12 Energy consumption for concurrent transmissions. a Epidemic, b six copies

nodes as possible during each dissemination round, using an Epidemic strategy would be
more effective.

For applications that involve many information producers, like those supporting environmental 
monitoring or ﬁrst responses during emergencies, a Spray and Wait approach is
probably more effective, due these networks have to be alive for long time periods.
Although the time for the message delivery is important in these scenarios, much more
important is to keep the network alive.

In order to make this type of decisions, it is important that software or protocols
designers count on a modeling approach that allows them to perform iterative modeling
and evaluations involving a low effort. In this sense, the proposed approach has an
advantage over the simulations and the empirical tests.

7 Conclusions and Future Work

This paper proposes a stochastic approach for modeling oppnets based on a Continuous
Time Markov Chain model. This approach allows modeling and evaluating message
delivery strategies on oppnets from an analytical point of view. Once created the model, it
can be easily reused, by reducing thus the effort required to create these models, compared
to implementing simulations or conducting empirical
the analytical
models can be instantiated or tuned in a simple way, which allows the iterative modeling
and contributes to reduce the time and effort required for evolve the message delivery
strategies. Therefore, the proposed approach is particularly useful to prototype solutions in
an interactive way and involving a low effort, compared to using simulations or empirical
tests. Designers of several types of systems, such as mobile collaborative systems, mobile
wireless sensors networks and mobile distributed systems can take advantage of it.

tests. Moreover,

In order to illustrate the usability and usefulness of the proposal, the message dissemination 
process for Epidemic and Spray and Wait routing strategies were modeled
using this approach. The resulting models were instantiated to determine the performance
of each routing strategy in particular interaction scenarios. This also allowed us to compare
the performance of these strategies in terms of mean time to absorption, expected number
of copies and residual energy in the network.

123

A Stochastic Approach for Modeling Message Dissemination in...

2225

The performance analysis introduced two parameters, C (number of message copies)
and H (number of hops used for the message delivery) for the Spray and Wait strategy. By
combining these parameters we can represent several strategies based on Spray and Wait
(e.g., binary, one copy or more than one).

The results of the performance analysis show that Epidemic routing is always the option
with the shortest delay in transmitting a message. However, it is also the strategy that
consumes more memory, and depending on the device discovery protocol, it may also
consume more energy than any strategy based on Spray and Wait. Contrarily, the Spray
and Wait is preferable in applications that need to save as much energy as possible, in order
to prolong the network autonomy. This strategy is also useful when the network nodes have
little memory. As previously shown, performing this kind of analysis usually involves a
low effort if we use the analytical models, opening thus an alternative to the simulations
and empirical tests.

The next steps in this initiative considers to evaluate the proposal formally comparing
the modeling effort required to represent message dissemination using the proposed
stochastic approach and also simulations. This will be done to quantify the reduction of the
modeling effort obtained for using this proposal.

Acknowledgements This work was partially supported by the Spanish government under the contracts
TIN2013-47245-C2-1-R and TIN2016-77836-C2-2-R.

References

1. Boldrini, C., Conti, M., & Passarella, A. (2008). Modelling data dissemination in opportunistic networks.
 In Proceedings of the third ACM workshop on Challenged networks, CHANTS (pp. 89–96).
ACM. doi:10.1145/1409985.1410002.

2. Boldrini, C., Conti, M., & Passarella, A. (2011). Modelling social-aware forwarding in opportunistic
networks. In K. Hummel, H. Hlavacs, & W. Gansterer (Eds.), Performance evaluation of computer and
communication systems. Milestones and future challenges, LNCS (pp. 141–152). Heidelberg: Springer.
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-25575-5_12.

3. Boldrini, C., Conti, M., & Passarella, A. (2014). Performance modelling of opportunistic forwarding
under heterogenous mobility. Computer Communications, 48, 56–70. doi:10.1016/j.comcom.2014.03.
028.

4. Cai, H., & Eun, D. Y. (2009). Crossing over the bounded domain: From exponential to power-law
intermeeting time in mobile ad hoc networks. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, 17(5),
1578–1591. doi:10.1109/TNET.2008.2011734.

5. Cho, D.K., Lee, S.H., Chang, A., Massey, T., Chang, C.W., Tsai, M.H., Sarrafzadeh, M., & Gerla, M.
(2008). Opportunistic medical monitoring using bluetooth p2p networks. In International symposium on
a world of wireless, mobile and multimedia networks. WoWMoM 2008. (pp. 1–6). doi:10.1109/
WOWMOM.2008.4594895.

6. Ciobanu, R.I., & Dobre, C. (2012). Predicting encounters in opportunistic networks. In Proceedings of
the 1st ACM workshop on high performance mobile opportunistic systems, HP-MOSys (pp. 9–14).
ACM. doi:10.1145/2386980.2386983.

7. Drula, C., Amza, C., Rousseau, F., & Duda, A. (2007). Adaptive energy conserving algorithms for
neighbor discovery in opportunistic bluetooth networks. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,
 25(1), 96–107. doi:10.1109/JSAC.2007.070110.

8. Ergen, M., & Varaiya, P. (2007). Decomposition of energy consumption in IEEE 802.11. In IEEE
international conference on communications, 2007. ICC’07. (pp. 403 –408). doi:10.1109/ICC.2007.73.
9. Garcia-Saavedra, A., Serrano, P., Banchs, A., & Bianchi, G. (2012). Energy consumption anatomy of
802.11 devices and its implication on modeling and design. In Proceedings of the 8th international
conference on Emerging networking experiments and technologies, CoNEXT (pp. 169–180). ACM.
doi:10.1145/2413176.2413197.

10. Garg, K., Giordano, S., & Fo¨rster, A. (2013). A study to understand the impact of node density on data
dissemination time in opportunistic networks. In Proceedings of the 2nd ACM workshop on high

123

2226

J. Orozco et al.

performance mobile opportunistic systems, HP-MOSys (pp. 9–16). ACM. doi:10.1145/2507908.
2507919.

11. Grasic, S., & Lindgren, A. (2012). An analysis of evaluation practices for dtn routing protocols. In
Proceedings of the seventh ACM international workshop on Challenged networks, CHANTS (pp.
57–64). ACM. doi:10.1145/2348616.2348629.

12. Groenevelt, R., Nain, P., & Koole, G. (2005). The message delay in mobile ad hoc networks. Performance 
Evaluation, 62, 210–228. doi:10.1016/j.peva.2005.07.018.

13. Kera¨nen, A., Ott, J., & Ka¨rkka¨inen, T. (2009). The one simulator for DTN protocol evaluation. In
Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on simulation tools and techniques, simutools (pp.
55:1–55:10). ICST (Institute for Computer Sciences, Social-Informatics and Telecommunications
Engineering). doi:10.4108/ICST.SIMUTOOLS2009.5674.

14. La, R. (2010). Distributional convergence of intermeeting times under the generalized hybrid random
walk mobility model. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, 9(9), 1201–1211. doi:10.1109/TMC.
2010.66.

15. Lambert, J. D. (1991). Numerical methods for ordinary differential systems: The initial value problem.

New York: Wiley.

16. Monares, A´ ., Ochoa, S., Santos, R., Orozco, J., Meseguer, R. (2014). Modeling IoT-based solutions

using human-centric wireless sensor networks. Sensors, 14(9), 15687–15713.

17. Mota, V. F., Cunha, F. D., Macedo, D. F., Nogueira, J. M., & Loureiro, A. A. (2014). Protocols,
mobility models and tools in opportunistic networks: A survey. Computer Communications, 48, 5–19.
doi:10.1016/j.comcom.2014.03.019.

18. Neglia, G., & Zhang, X. (2006). Optimal delay-power tradeoff in sparse delay tolerant networks: a
preliminary study. In Proceedings of the 2006 SIGCOMM workshop on challenged networks, CHANTS
(pp. 237–244). ACM. doi:10.1145/1162654.1162661.

19. Reina, D. G., Askalani, M., Toral, S. L., Barrero, F., Asimakopoulou, E., & Bessis, N. (2015). A survey
on multihop ad hoc networks for disaster response scenarios. Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks,
2015, 16. doi:10.1155/2015/647037.

20. Sakaguchi, H., Izumi, T., & Nakatani, Y. (2013). An opportunistic tourism navigation system using
photographing point recommendation. In 2013 conference on technologies and applications of artiﬁcial
intelligence (TAAI) (pp. 318–323). doi:10.1109/TAAI.2013.69.

21. Santos, R., & Ochoa, S. (2011). Disseminating shared information in disaster relief efforts: A communication 
computable model. IEEE international conference on systems, man and cybernetics 2011
(pp. 3446–3451).

22. Santos, R., Orozco, J., & Ochoa, S. F. (2011). A real-time analysis approach in opportunistic networks.

ACM SIGBED Review, 8(3), 40–43. doi:10.1145/2038617.2038626.

23. Santos, R., Mosse, D., Znati, T., Comfort, L. (2016). Design and implementation of a Witness Unit for

opportunistic routing in tsunami alert scenarios. Safety Science, 90, 75–83.

24. Sermpezis, P., & Spyropoulos, T. (2014). Understanding the effects of social selﬁshness on the performance 
of heterogeneous opportunistic networks. Computer Communications, 48, 71–83. doi:10.
1016/j.comcom.2014.03.016.

25. Spyropoulos, T., Turletti, T., & Obraczka, K. (2009). Routing in delay-tolerant networks comprising
heterogeneous node populations. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, 8(8), 1132–1147. doi:10.
1109/TMC.2008.172.

26. Wang, W., Srinivasan, V., & Motani, M. (2007). Adaptive contact probing mechanisms for delay
tolerant applications. In Proceedings of the 13th annual ACM international conference on Mobile
computing and networking, MobiCom (pp. 230–241). ACM. doi:10.1145/1287853.1287882.

27. Whitbeck, J., Conan, V., & de Amorim, M. (2011). Performance of opportunistic epidemic routing on
edge-markovian dynamic graphs. IEEE Transactions on Communications, 59(5), 1259–1263. doi:10.
1109/TCOMM.2011.020811.090163.

28. Yao, H., Huang, H., Zeng, D., Li, B., & Guo, S. (2014). An energy-aware deadline-constrained message

delivery in delay-tolerant networks. Wireless Networks, 20, 1981–1993.

29. Yoon, S.K., & Haas, Z.J. (2007). Efﬁcient tradeoff of restricted epidemic routing in mobile ad-hoc
networks. In Military communications conference, 2007. MILCOM 2007 (pp. 1 –7). IEEE. doi:10.1109/
MILCOM.2007.4455272.

30. Zhang, X., Neglia, G., Kurose, J., & Towsley, D. (2007). Performance modeling of epidemic routing.

Computer Networks, 51(10), 2867–2891. doi:10.1016/j.comnet.2006.11.028.

123

A Stochastic Approach for Modeling Message Dissemination in...

2227

Javier Orozco Graduated as Electrical Engineer from the Universidad
Nacional del Sur in 1984, he obtained the Doctorate in Engineering in
1998. His main research area is in real time modeling and scheduling for
embedded systems. He is a full professor in digital circuit design and
Independent Researcher at CONICET. During the doctorate period he
concentrated on the modeling of hard real-time systems providing analytical 
schedulability tests for real time systems with heterogeneous,
functional and not functional, requirements.

Rodrigo Santos is an Adjunt Professor and Independent Researcher at
Universidad Nacional del Sur and CONICET, Argentina. His research
interests are in the ﬁeld of real-time systems, embedded systems and
collaborative systems. He has been President of the Center of Latinamerican 
Center of Studies in Informatics and vice-chair of the IFIP
WG 6.9 Communications for Developing Countries.

Sergio F. Ochoa is an associate professor at the Computer Science
Department at University of Chile. He has received his Phd. From
Pontiﬁcia Universidad Cato´lica de Chile. His research interests are in
the are of mobile/ubiquitous/social computing, in particular oriented to
the context awareness interaccions and loosely-couple work and system 
modeling. He also works in collaborative systems applied to urban
emergencies and disaster relief efforts and in the area of software
engineering specially in software systems modeling, requirements
engineering and communication and coordination.

123

2228

J. Orozco et al.

Roc Meseguer is an associate professor in the Computer Architecture
Department at the Universitat Polite`cnica de catalunya (UPC), where
he is a member of the Computer Networks and Distributed Systems
Research Group. His research interests include socioeconomic-oriented 
distributed systems, particularly resource allocation for largescale 
systems (peer-to-peer, cloud, mobile ad hoc networks, and so
on); decentralized systems applied to ambient intelligent; computersupported 
cooperative work (CSCW) and learning (CSCL); and
community networks based on bottom-up initiatives. He has a PhD in
computer science from the Universitat Polite`cnica de catalunya (UPC).

123

