Scheduling Real-Time Traﬃc in Underwater

Acoustic Wireless Sensor Networks

Rodrigo Santos1(B), Javier Orozco1, Mat´ıas Micheletto1, Sergio F. Ochoa2,

Roc Meseguer3, Pere Millan4, and Carlos Molina4

1 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computers,

IIIE, UNS-CONICET, Bah´ıa Blanca, Argentina

ierms@criba.edu.ar, jadorozco@gmail.com, matiasmicheletto@gmail.com

2 Computer Science Department, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile

3 Department of Computer Architecture, Universidad Polit´ecnica de Catalunya,

sochoa@dcc.uchile.cl

Barcelona, Spain

meseguer@ac.upc.edu

Universitat Rovira i Virgili, Tarragona, Spain

4 Department of Computer Engineering,
{pere.millan,carlos.molina}@urv.net

Abstract. Underwater sensor networks are an important ﬁeld of
research. Several applications require the use of this kind of networks
like tsunami or oil spill alerts. The underwater medium is very harsh
and only acoustic signals can be used for the transmission of information.
 The use of this kind of networks is still in a developing state far
from reaching standard consensus on basic aspects like carrier frequency
or modulation techniques. The use of these networks for real-time applications 
has not been analyzed previously. In this paper we present two
solutions for the scheduling of real-time messages and we provide a time
constraint analysis of the performance of the network.

Keywords: Underwater sensor networks · Environmental monitoring

1 Introduction

Underwater acoustic wireless sensor networks are becoming a hot research topic
as they have turned into the primary tool to monitor and to act upon the wellbeing 
of marine environments [1,2]. Radio frequency electromagnetic signals do
not propagate well underwater. Huge amount of power is required to transmit
messages even for short distances. The presence of particles and moving obstacles,
 such as ﬁshes or plants, prevents the use of optical carriers. For underwater
transmissions, the best option is to use acoustic carriers. While wireless sensor
networks based on radio frequency transmissions have been studied and several
protocols have been proposed like ZigBee, Bluetooth or even Wi-Fi, the solutions 
achieved for them are not useful for acoustic underwater networks, since
c(cid:2) Springer International Publishing AG 2016
C.R. Garc´ıa et al. (Eds.): UCAmI 2016, Part II, LNCS 10070, pp. 150–162, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-48799-1 19

Scheduling Real-Time Traﬃc in Underwater Acoustic Wireless Sensor

151

propagation delay is usually larger than transmission time. A message may be
received well after its transmission has ﬁnished in the source node.

Tsunamis are generated by earthquakes in the ocean. Not every earthquake
in the ocean produces a tsunami but the existence of an earthquake may end
in a tragic tsunami, like the ones in Japan 2011 or Indonesia 2004. Detecting a
tsunami is a hard task. Seismic sensors may be deployed in the area in which
the earthquake may take place (geologic fault) and if one is detected, acording
to its intensity a tsunami alert may be issued. The time available between the
earthquake and the arrival of the wave to the beach depends on the distance
to the earthquake epicenter. However, it is clear that there is a hard real-time
restriction as the alert should be issued with enough time for people to move
into a safe place.

The detection system may have some buoys anchored along the fault and
linked to the seismic sensors, so once the earthquake is detected, the buoy connects 
through a satellite network to a disaster-management oﬃce reporting the
event, intensity, and tsunami probability. However, buoys could be vandalized,
jeopardizing the network operation. To avoid this, an underwater acoustic sensor 
network is proposed operating in real-time. The network deployment, nodes
distribution and number of hops discussion is out of the scope of this paper.
However, the real-time analysis and network performance modeling proposed
here can be used to set-up the appropriate network.

Real-time (RT) communications require not only that messages are transmitted 
properly but also before a particular instant named deadline. If the deadline
is missed, the message is not valid and may have serious consequences [3]. A feasible 
RT schedule is one in which all messages comply with their deadlines. RT
message scheduling in multi-hop networks is a complex problem that requires
the use of routing and queueing techniques. If all the nodes in the network have
a direct link to the rest of the nodes, the problem may be solved using an integer
linear programming approach, as presented later in the paper. However, when a
message should go through intermediate nodes, it is not only a question of when a
node should transmit (MAC problem) but also of selecting the appropriate path.
In this case, the shortest path is not always the best one as a per-node scheduling
should be incorporated in the analysis. In fact, a node holding more than one
message has to schedule their transmission introducing additional delays.

Recently, we have proposed a simple distributed medium access control protocol 
(MAC) for the case of underwater wireless sensors networks [4]. The network
was modeled as a tree with a sonobuoy as root and sensors as leafs. The information 
ﬂow was from the leafs to the root using intermediate nodes for aggregating
the information collected in the previous layer. The synchronization process was
made in a hierarchical way from the root to the leafs. At each layer a synchronizing 
node was selected following certain rules and these nodes were in charged
of aggregating the messages during the data transmission stage. The proposed
algorithm considered the possibility of re-conﬁguring the tree periodically. However,
 it was not designed to operate under RT constraints, power considerations
were not incorporated in the analysis, and the possibility of transferring data

152

R. Santos et al.

between any pair of nodes was not evaluated. In this paper, we use the initialization 
phase in which the nodes are synchronized and the network topology is
discovered. After this, messages may be sent between any pair of nodes.

As in standard wireless sensors networks (WSN), the most common MAC
protocols can be grouped in two classes: Carrier Sense Multiple Access (CSMA)
and Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) oriented. In the ﬁrst one, nodes
transmit whenever they are able to lock the shared channel. For RT messages
this approach is not useful as message delays may be unbounded. TDMA may
introduce an important latency but the worst case delay may be computed and
the timed behavior of the network is predictable. Moreover, the TDMA approach
can be divided in two modes. The ﬁrst one considers that each node sends a
broadcast to every node within transmission range. In this case, if a node has
several messages to transmit to diﬀerent destinations, it has to wait for equal
number of frames. In the second approach, a per-message TDMA is computed in
such a way that the slot for sending a message from node a to node b is deﬁned,
and also the moment at which node b receives the message from node a. In this
case, each message has a particular slot to be sent and received at destination,
and the nodes may wait for the proper instants to become active.

Underwater sensor networks operate with acoustic carriers. Two basic
approaches are followed in the medium access protocol: those based in CSMA
[5,6] and those based in TDMA [7,8]. The ﬁrst group can not guarantee a RT
performance so we are not going to comment on them. The second group proposes 
diﬀerent algorithms to allocate the nodes within the frame. In [9] the
authors proposed an heuristic approach, however they are not considering RT
constraints. In [7] the authors propose a dynamic slot-allocation. This approach
provides an important feature as the network may change its topology so new
allocations are necessary. However, the approach is not considering the routing
and RT constraints involved in the node-to-node transmissions. Finally, in [8]
the authors put the focus on energy aspects and the transmission power use. To
this end, they optimize the node allocation mechanism. As in the previous cases,
no RT analysis is performed.
Contribution: This paper extends the algorithm proposed in [10] to include RT
constraints and message transfers between any pair of nodes in the system. A
TDMA access protocol is proposed with an oﬀ-line allocation and scheduling
algorithm. Feasibility conditions are given for the system to operate with hard
RT constraints.

2 System Model

2.1 Physical Model

For the sake of simplicity, we assume the propagation delay between two nodes
within transmission range is equal in both directions. That is, if a message originating 
in node a requires four time slots to reach node b, then a message originating 
in b also requires four time slots to reach a.

Scheduling Real-Time Traﬃc in Underwater Acoustic Wireless Sensor

153

Fig. 1. Acoustic waves propagation and interference

In Fig. 1, lets suppose that both nodes begin their transmission simultaneously.
 Both messages propagate at the same speed and have the same duration:
one slot time. Under the previous assumption, a collision happens exactly at
two time slots. However, as these are longitudinal waves, there is a transitory
composition of both waves at the point of collision, but both of them continue
their propagation. If the transmission power is enough, both nodes receive each
other message after four time slots. It is important to note that local collisions
do not propagate and that nodes only detect a local collision.

2.2 Real-Time Message Model

We assume that any node may transmit a message to any other node in the
network if there is a valid path between both nodes. We denote a message from
node a to node b as mab. We also assume all messages require one time slot to
be transmitted, and that they are sent periodically. Additionally, all messages
should be received before the associated deadline. Pab and Dab denote the period
and deadline, respectively. In general we deﬁne the set of messages as Z =
{mij(Pij, Dij)}.

2.3 Network Model

The network can be modeled as a directed graph G = (V, E), in which V is
the set of nodes in the network and E the set of edges. If two nodes u and
v are within transmission range, there is an edge connecting them: e = (u, v).
Each edge has a label that represents the transmission delay between the nodes
measured in time slots, τuv. The set of nodes which have a direct link with i ∈ V
is the neighbor set and is denoted N(i). As collisions are important only if they
are produced at the node, there are four diﬀerent scenarios as stated in [9]. The
ﬁrst scenario is when two messages arrive simultaneously to a node: this case is
named the Rx-Rx case. The second scenario is produced when two messages tried
to be transmitted simultaneously in a node: Tx-Tx case. The third secenario is

154

R. Santos et al.

when a message is transmitted at the time another one is being received: this
is the Tx-Rx case. The last one is named the Rx-Interference case and it arises
when a message interferes another one in a node. The interfering message has a
diﬀerent destination node. This last case is similar to the Rx-Rx case.

We propose a slot allocation method to order the access of the nodes to the
channel, in such a way that each message originated in a node may reach its destination 
node without collisions. We begin considering that destination nodes
are within transmission range of source/transmission node, and later we extend
the analysis for nodes at larger distances. Stated in this way, the slot assignment 
problem is an extension of the graph-coloring problem [11]. The problem
is similar to the L(2,1) labeling on graphs and the frequency assignment [12].
We present an integer linear programming (ILP) model, to minimize the
frame length measured in slots. If we note mi ∈ N the slot in which node i
transmits, we have the following: Minimize
≥τij + 1 − M
≤τij − 1
≥τik − τj + 1 − M
≤τik − τij − 1
∈{0, 1}
∈{0, 1}

∀i ∈ V,∀j ∈ N(i)
∀i ∈ V,∀j ∈ N(i)
∀i ∈ V ∀j, k ∈ N(i)
∀i ∈ V ∀j, k ∈ N(i)
∀i ∈ V ∀j ∈ N(i)
∀i ∈ V ∀j, k ∈ N(i)

mi − mj − M δij
mi − mj − M δij
mj − mk − M ωijk
mj − mk − M ωijk
δij

(cid:2)

i mi subject to:

ωijk

where M is a suﬃciently large constant. The model is signiﬁcantly more complex
if a per-message slot allocation is performed. Further details in [9].

3 Scheduling

Path discovery is a well known problem in networking. Several algorithms have
been proposed to compute the best path for a message to reach destination
from a source. The most common solutions are based on Dijsktra algorithm to
determine the shortest path from any node in the network to any other node
(SPF, shortest path ﬁrst) or the Bellman-Ford distance vector algorithm. In the
case of communication networks, the cost associated to the edges may be related
to the actual delay between the nodes, an economical cost for using that link
(paying service to a third party company) or the power required to use the link.
For real-time messages, the total delay in the path should be less or equal to the
deadline of the message. If this condition is not guaranteed, the message is not
schedulable and the network does not fulﬁll the real-time requirements.

∀a, b

Dab ≥ (cid:3)

e∈path(ab)

τe

(1)

Equation (1) sets the basic condition for the network to be schedulable. This
requires that the sum of the transmission delays in each hop of the path, plus
the time needed in each intermediate node to gain access to the channel, should

Scheduling Real-Time Traﬃc in Underwater Acoustic Wireless Sensor

155

be less or equal to the deadline of the message. Besides, the transmission to the
next hop should be scheduled in such a way that no collisions are produced at
the destination or intermediate nodes.

When a node has several messages ready to be transmitted, a scheduling
policy should be implemented to sort the transmission. Particularly we used the
First-In First-Out policy (FIFO) that is easy to implement. However, messages
do not have a priority associated, so an urgent message may wait for several
frames before being transmitted. As messages are periodic, the waiting time in
the queue is computed from the worst case arrival of the message to the queue
and the frame length. Depending on the kind of TDMA computed (node or
message allocation) the node should have one or more queues, depending on the
amount of neighbors. In either case, the frame size Tf is used as the time needed
to compute the delay in the waiting queue Wi in the node, Eq. 2. Q is the length
of the queue at the instant of message arrival or generation.

Wi = (Q − 1)Tf + mi

(2)

4 Example

In this section we present a simple example to show the diﬀerent aspects discussed 
in the previous sections. Figure 2 shows a ﬁve node network with the
labels in the edges denoting the transmission delay between adjacent nodes.

Fig. 2. Five nodes network example

The ILP model for this network has twelve messages for allocating in the
frame. Each node transmits a message to all its neighbors. The transmission and
reception scheme is shown in Table 1 where T (ab) stands for a slot used by node
a to send a message to node b and R(ba) stands for a message received at node
a from node b. The allocation was computed with GLPK 4.55 [13].

The schedule presented is minimum for transmitting a message from each
node in the network to all its neighbors. The frame size has a duration of 13
slots. The empty slots consider the fact that messages should not interfere in the
reception. Node a is active only in 4 out of 13 slots so it may save energy being
kept oﬀ during the slots at which it has no activity.

The frame imposes a general upper bound for each hop. That is, in the worst
case, for each hop in the path a whole time frame delay is introduced. Thus,
transmitting a message from node a to node e, the SPF algorithm has a lower
bound of 10 slots and an upper bound of 17 slots. In the analysis we are still not

156

R. Santos et al.

Table 1. Message/Slot allocation for transmission and reception.

Node Slots

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

T (ab) T (ad)

T (bd)

T (de)

T (bc)

T (ce)

R(ab)

T (ba)

R(cb)

R(db)

R(bc) T (cb)

R(ec)

R(bd) R(ed)

R(ad) T (da) T (db)

R(ba)

R(da)

T (ed)

R(de)

R(ce)

T (ec)

a

b

c

d

c

Table 2. Node/Slot allocation for transmission of messages.

Node Slots

1

2

3

4

5

6

T (a)

T (b)

T (d)

R(b) R(d)

R(d) R(a) R(c)

T (c) R(b) R(e)

R(b) R(e) R(a)

T (e)

R(d)

R(c)

a

b

c

d

e

considering queueing problems in the nodes. This means that in node a there is
just one message that has to be sent to node d and in this last one, only one
message (the one received from a) has to be forwarded to node e. If this is not the
case, a scheduling policy in each node should be selected and the transmission
delay increases. If a per-node slot allocation scheme is used, the frame is reduced
to just 6 slots, but a node requires several frames to send consecutive messages
to the neighbors, and all the neighbors are listening while they are transmitting.
Table 2 shows this case.

As previously, node a is on in 3 out of 6 slots, being oﬀ in the rest (saving

power). Let us consider a set of 8 messages.

Z = {mae(20, 30), mac(20, 30), mea(20, 30), mca(20, 30), mde(20, 30),
mdb(10, 10), mbc(10, 10), mae(15, 20)}

(3)

A message from a to e has a transmission delay of 8 units and goes through
2 nodes a and d before reaching destination. For the case of node allocation, and
considering a queue with one place for each connected neighbor, in the worst
case the message has to wait for 1 frame (Q = 2) in node a to be transmitted at
the next one, see (2). Once arrived to node d it may wait for 2 frames (Q = 3)
before being transmitted to node e.

τae = Wa + Wd + τad + τde = 6 + 1 + 5 + 12 + 1 + 3 = 26

In the described situation, considering the worst case, mae has an end-toend 
delay of 26 slots. Computing in the same way for the rest of the messages,
we found the worst-case delays for all messages as presented in Table 3. The

Scheduling Real-Time Traﬃc in Underwater Acoustic Wireless Sensor

157

Table 3. Messages worst-case delays

mij mae mac mea mca mde mdb mbc mbe

τij

26

25

29

29

16

16

16

21

network scheduling of the proposed example shows that the system is stable and
that messages will be transmitted through the network within their deadlines.

5 Heuristic Approach

In the proposed model, the variables that aﬀect the communication speed and
therefore the timing of the system are the frame duration, the order of transmission 
and reception of messages, and the route that each message follows within
the network. In this section an heuristic algorithm is presented to optimize the
message/slot allocation to minimize the frame size and meet the deadlines.

The minimum length frame is not necessarily the optimal to meet the system
time requirements, and this impedes uncoupling the computation of the frame
with respect to the computation of the routes. The heuristic presented in this
section generates a ﬁxed length frame and optimizes the paths of the messages
to meet all system deadlines.

Let H denote the least common multiple between all message periods. If the
frame is a time window of ﬁxed length H, there is a number H/Pi,j instances of
the message mi,j, so mi,j,k denotes the k-th instance of the message mi,j.

Each instance mi,j,k has an associated path which is chosen from all possible
paths between nodes i and j. The path is denoted pathi,j,k and contains the
nodes of the network which the message goes through. Optimal path for each
instance must be computed to obtain the best solution, as will be explained
later.

As messages require communication between nodes to propagate through the
network, node allocation in the frame is performed following the corresponding
route. Each node must be allocated to the minimum slot to ensure meeting all
deadlines.

Each node is associated to a binary interference matrix which simpliﬁes the
collision avoidance scheduling. This matrix has dimensions n by τmax where n
is the number of nodes and τmax is the delay between the transmitting node
and its farthest neighbor. For the i-th node, the element (i, 1) of the interference
matrix is always 1, and the element (j, s) is 1 if and only if j-th node has a
communication delay of s slots from i-th node. To perform allocability test of a
transmitter node to a desired slot, interference matrix of the transmitter node
is overlapped on the frame so that the ﬁrst column of the interference matrix
match the column of the frame correspondig to the allocation slot and ﬁnally an
element by element product is computed. If the result is a null matrix, then the
allocability test is positive, which means transmitter node is allocable to that
slot. In Sect. 5.1 we present the allocation procedure for the example of Sect. 4.

158

R. Santos et al.

Algorithm 1. Scheduling algorithm pseudocode.

frame:=zeros(N,H) // Frame matrix initialization.
forall the mi,j,k sorted by increasing order of periods do

slot:=(k − 1) · Pi,j // First slot of period.
transmitter:=pathi,j,k (ﬁrst) // First node of path.
receiver:=pathi,j,k (second) // Second node of path.
destination:=pathi,j,k (last) // Last node of path.
while True do

if allocable(frame, transmitter, slot) then

allocate(frame, transmitter, slot)
slot:=slot+τtransmitter,receiver
if receiver==destination then

break

end
else

transmitter:=receiver
receiver:=pathi,j,k (next) // Next node of path.

end

end
else

slot:=slot+1
if slot==H then

return ’Non schedulable system with chosen paths’

end

end

end
margini,j:=j ∗ Pi + Di - slot

end
return margini,j, frame

Once all path nodes are allocated, the message has arrived to destination,
and remaining time until deadline is computed and denoted by margini,j,k.
Pseudocode 1 shows the scheduling procedure required to generate the communication 
frame.

5.1 Node Allocation Example

Based on the example of Sect. 4, Table 4 shows a slice of the frame where there
are free and taken slots. It is desired to know if node d is allocable to slot 9. As
it can be seen (Table 5), if node d transmits at slot 9, there is a Rx-Rx collision
on node b at slot 12 and a Tx-Rx collision on node e at slot 12. Following the
same procedure, node d is not allocable to slot 10 either. Finally, Table 6 shows
that node d is allocable to slot 11.

Scheduling Real-Time Traﬃc in Underwater Acoustic Wireless Sensor

159

Table 4. Slice of the communication frame.

Table 5. Allocation test of node d to slot 9. Collision slots highlighted.

Table 6. Allocation test of node d to slot 11.

5.2 Optimization Algorithm

Towards obtaining optimal path for each message instance, diﬀerent optimization
algorithms can be implemented to solve the problem. Figure 3 shows a simplistic
representation of the optimization model, that iterates over a loop in order to
improve the solution’s quality. As it is desired to ﬁnd a frame where communication 
between nodes allows messages to reach their destination in the minimum
number of slots as possible, it is considered the summation of all delay margins
between the arrival time of messages and their deadlines as the quality of the
solution. In the context of mathematical optimization, the objective function
takes as input the set of paths for each message instance and returns a scalar
quantity as output, which represents the quality of the proposed solution. The
objective function computes the output following three basic steps: ﬁrst, generates 
the communication frame following the Algorithm 1; second, determines the

Fig. 3. Optimization model.

160

R. Santos et al.

Table 7. SPF and Genetic Algorithm solutions evaluation

mi,j,k SPF

GA

pathi,j,k delay margin pathi,j,k delay margin

ma,e,1 a-d-e

ma,e,2 a-d-e

ma,e,3 a-d-e

ma,c,1 a-b-c

ma,c,2 a-b-c

ma,c,3 a-b-c

me,a,1 e-d-a

me,a,2 e-d-a

me,a,3 e-d-a

mc,a,1 c-b-a

mc,a,2 c-b-a

mc,a,3 c-b-a

md,e,1 d-e

md,e,2 d-e

md,e,3 d-e

md,b,1 d-b

md,b,2 d-b

md,b,3 d-b

md,b,4 d-b

md,b,5 d-b

md,b,6 d-b

mb,c,1 b-c

mb,c,2 b-c

mb,c,3 b-c

mb,c,4 b-c

mb,c,5 b-c

mb,c,6 b-c

mb,e,1 b-d-e

mb,e,2 b-d-e

mb,e,3 b-d-e

mb,e,4 b-d-e

21

22

22

19

22

19

21

19

19

17

18

14

16

19

15

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

12

14

12

14

a-d-e

a-d-e

a-d-e

a-b-c

a-b-c

a-b-c

e-d-a

e-d-a

e-d-a

c-b-a

c-b-a

c-b-a

d-e

d-e

d-e

d-b

d-b

d-b

d-b

d-b

d-b

b-c

b-c

b-c

b-c

b-c

b-c

b-c-e

b-d-e

b-d-e

b-c-e

21

22

22

21

22

19

21

21

21

18

18

17

19

19

16

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

12

12

12

12

Scheduling Real-Time Traﬃc in Underwater Acoustic Wireless Sensor

161

delay margin for each instance; and ﬁnally computes the solution quality as the
summation of all delay margins.

5.3 Analysis of Results

The proposed heuristic is better suited for complex problems where there are
multiple paths for diﬀerent messages. However, example of Sect. 4 is considered
for better understanding of the situation. To begin with a simple case, the objective 
function was tested using shortest path for each message. Table 7 shows the
delay margins of each message instance. This solution is feasible, has no message
collisions, and no deadline is missed. Moreover, to improve the previous result,
a genetic algorithm was used to ﬁnd an optimal solution. Several instances of
the optimization ﬁnd the same solution which has a slight diﬀerence with the
previous one. As it can be seen from the results in Table 7, message 8 alternates
its path in the ﬁrst and last instance, and this relieves the load of node d, so
other messages reach their destination with greater delay margin.

6 Conclusions and Future Work

This paper presented a RT analysis for an underwater acoustic wireless network.
We introduced two approaches. In the ﬁrst one, the network is analyzed with
ILP techniques. The shortest path is used as routing policy combined with a
message or node slot allocation procedure in a TDMA frame. Based on this,
we presented the schedulability condition for the case in which messages are
transmitted following a First-In First-Out policy. This scheduling discipline is
quite simple and requires little processing within the underwater nodes, reducing
the computing complexity and demand on the processors. However, better results
may be obtained if some RT priority policies are implemented, like ﬁxed priorities
or earliest deadline ﬁrst. The performance of the network is left for future work.
The second solution is based on a heuristic approach. In this case, messages
are scheduled following a per-link approach and ﬁnding the route with shortest
delay. The solution obtained improves the two step approach of ﬁnding the SPF
in the ﬁrst place, for allocating the slots within the frame later. As this heuristic
only considers the messages actually being transmitted, unnecessary restrictions
are avoided. We also presented a real application in which RT transmissions are
necessary. Tsunami early alert problem is a very important issue for countries
in the Paciﬁc and Indic oceans and the routing proposal introduced here may
help meet the RT requirements.

Acknowledgments. This work has been partially supported by the Spanish Ministry 
of Science and Innovation (MCI) and FEDER funds of the EU under contracts
TIN2013-44375-R, TIN2013-47245-C2-1-R and TIN2013-47245-C2-2-R, and also CONFINE 
project: FP7-288535.

162

R. Santos et al.

References

1. A¸car, G., Adams, A.: Acmenet: an underwater acoustic sensor network protocol
for real-time environmental monitoring in coastal areas. IEE Proc. Radar Sonar
Navig. 153(4), 365–380 (2006)

2. Akyildiz, I., Pompili, D., Melodia, T.: Underwater acoustic sensor networks:

research challenges. Ad Hoc Netw. 3(3), 257–279 (2005)

3. Liu, C.L., Layland, J.W.: Scheduling algorithms for multiprogramming in a hard

real-time environment. J. Assoc. Comput. Mach. 20(1), 46–61 (1973)

4. Santos, R., Orozco, J., Ochoa, S.F., Meseguer, R., Eggly, G., Pistonesi, M.F.: A
MAC protocol to support monitoring of underwater spaces. Sensors 16(7), 984
(2016)

5. Guo, X., Frater, M.R., Ryan, M.J.: A propagation-delay-tolerant collision avoidance 
protocol for underwater acoustic sensor networks. In: OCEANS 2006-Asia
Paciﬁc, pp. 1–6, May 2006

6. Pompili, D., Melodia, T., Akyildiz, I.: A CDMA-based medium access control for
underwater acoustic sensor networks. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 8(4), 1899–
1909 (2009)

7. Chen, Y.D., Lien, C.Y., Chuang, S.W., Shih, K.P.: Dsss: A TDMA-based MAC
protocol with dynamic slot scheduling strategy for underwater acoustic sensor networks.
 In: OCEANS 2011 IEEE-Spain, pp. 1–6 (2011)

8. Diamant, R., Lampe, L.: Spatial reuse time-division multiple access for broadcast
ad hoc underwater acoustic comm. networks. IEEE J. Oceanic Eng. 36(2), 172–185
(2011)

9. Guan, Y., Shen, C.C., Yackoski, J.: MAC scheduling for high throughput underwater 
acoustic networks. In: 2011 IEEE Wireless Comms and Networking Conference,
pp. 197–202 (2011)

10. Santos, R., Orozco, J., Ochoa, S.F., Messeguer, R., Eggly, G.: A MAC protocol
for underwater sensors networks. In: Garc´ıa-Chamizo, J.M., et al. (eds.) UCAmI
2015. LNCS, vol. 9454, pp. 394–406. Springer, Heidelberg (2015). doi:10.1007/
978-3-319-26401-1 37

11. Lv, C., Wang, S., Tan, M., Chen, L.: UA-MAC: an underwater acoustic channel
access method for dense mobile underwater sensor networks. Int. J. Distrib. Sens.
Netw. (2014)

12. Shao, Z., Yeh, R.K., Zhang, D.: The L(2, 1)-labeling on graphs and the frequency

assignment problem. Appl. Math. Lett. 21(1), 37–41 (2008)

13. Makhorin, A.: GLPK (GNU) linear programming kit. https://www.gnu.org/

software/glpk/. Accessed 10 Sep 2016

