Pers Ubiquit Comput (2011) 15:365–376
DOI 10.1007/s00779-010-0357-x

O R I G I N A L A R T I C L E

EDIPS: an Easy to Deploy Indoor Positioning System to support
loosely coupled mobile work

Rodrigo Vera • Sergio F. Ochoa • Roberto G. Aldunate

Received: 29 September 2010 / Accepted: 4 December 2010 / Published online: 26 January 2011
Ó Springer-Verlag London Limited 2011

Abstract Loosely coupled mobile work is characterized
by nomadic workers collaborating in sporadically and ondemand 
ways. Supporting nomadic workers’ interactions
requires knowing the location of the potential collaborator;
therefore, indoor/outdoor positioning systems play a key
role. Locating persons in outdoor environments is well
addressed by Global Positioning Systems (GPS); however,
for the indoor scenario,
the solution is not so clear.
Although several proposals for indoor positioning have
been reported in the literature, most of them demand
important setup efforts. This article presents the Easy to
Deploy Indoor Positioning System (EDIPS), a WiFi-based
system able to support the typical location requirements
involved in loosely coupled mobile work. EDIPS is aimed
for fast deployment and real-time operations rather than for
location accuracy. The system was preliminary evaluated
as a support for locating medical interns’ in a simulated
hospital. The results obtained indicate the solution is able
to locate nomadic workers in an indoor scenario, with
enough accuracy to support loosely coupled mobile work,
while requiring minimal setup effort.

R. Vera  S. F. Ochoa (&)
Department of Computer Science, Universidad de Chile,
Av. Blanco Encalada 2120, 3er Piso, Santiago, Chile
e-mail: sochoa@dcc.uchile.cl

R. Vera
e-mail: rvera@dcc.uchile.cl

R. G. Aldunate
Applied Research Associates, Inc., Champaign, IL, USA
e-mail: raldunate@ara.com

R. G. Aldunate
Facultad de Ingenieria, Universidad Catolica de Temuco,
Temuco, Chile
e-mail: raldunate@uct.cl

Indoor positioning system  User location

Keywords
estimation  Loosely coupled mobile work  Nomadic users

1 Introduction

During the last years, we have witnessed a revolution on
mobile computing solutions. Advances in wireless communication 
technologies and mobile computing devices
(from cellular phones to laptops) have allowed organizations,
 professionals, and individuals transfer part of their
activities from desktop computers to these mobile devices
[13]. Technological advances are also changing the work
scenario and the human behavior and needs. Now, many
persons are becoming ‘‘mobile workers’’ who want to be
able to use any available time to continue working, independently 
of the place where they are located (e.g. at the
ofﬁce, a coffee shop, a plane or just walking) [5, 22].

Several researchers have shown that the computer-supported 
mobile work can improve the productivity of nomadic
users in particular scenarios, such as healthcare [33], education 
[34], productive processes [28], mobile commerce
[41], and emergency response processes [1]. Computersupported 
mobile work includes various styles of work:
uncoupled work (e.g. work done by mobile workers using
only local resources), loosely coupled work (e.g. a mobile
worker interacting on-demand with servers and/or mobile
workers during short periods of time) and tightly coupled
work (e.g. nomadic users working connected to servers/other
mobile users) [17]. However, the most common mobile work
style is loosely coupled [29]. Since interactions between
nomadic users doing loosely coupled work are on-demand,
positioning potential collaborators is a key issue for many
activities, e.g., a nurse needing to ﬁnd a physician to report
changes in the health condition of a patient.

123

366

Pers Ubiquit Comput (2011) 15:365–376

During the last years, positioning techniques and technologies 
have been strongly researched and developed. In
particular, real-time positioning systems have generated
strong attention given the high impact they might have on the
broad spectrum of applications where ubiquitous information 
and services are predominant. Global Positioning System 
(GPS) is one of the most common and accepted
technologies for outdoor positioning. Nevertheless, for
indoors, GPS technology becomes infertile given its highly
degraded or blocked satellite signal inside of buildings.

There are also several research works aimed at supporting 
mobile users’ positioning in indoors. However,
most of them require an important setup effort, which
sometimes jeopardizes the feasibility of deploying a users
positioning solution.

Key challenges for this type of indoor positioning systems 
are the capability of being deployed quickly and
supporting real-time operations. These challenges set apart
this type of positioning system from most of current technologies,
 which focus on higher accuracy achievements, a
feature not mandatory for loosely coupled mobile work.

This article presents the Easy to Deploy Indoor Positioning 
System (EDIPS), a WiFi-based system aimed for
fast deployment and real-time operations rather than for
high accuracy in positioning. The system is able to run in a
broad range of mobile computing devices (from PDAs to
tablet PCs) and interoperate in order to locate nomadic
users by means of WiFi networks. Once deployed, the
system is able to recognize the environment where the user
is located, position other users on a map and react to
changes on the user location.

This positioning system can be added as a service into
other software applications to provide user positioning
awareness. EDIPS has been preliminary tested in a physical
scenario simulating hospital facilities. Preliminary results
indicate the system is easy to deploy and useful to position
nomadic users performing loosely coupled mobile work.

Next section presents the related work. Section 3 explains
the positioning model used by EDIPS. Section 4 describes
the EDIPS architecture, its main components, and its user
interface. Section 5 presents the evaluation process conducted 
to determine the accuracy of the EDIPS positioning
system. Section 6 describes the evaluation conducted with
medical interns in a simulated hospital scenario. Finally,
Sect. 7 presents the conclusions and the future work.

2 Related work

Ample literature is available for real-time indoor positioning 
[4, 16, 23, 32]. Results describing partially successful 
efforts are available since at least a decade ago [3].
The existing proposals differ mainly in term of both the

123

method used to estimate the position of a resource and also
the technology utilized to support the location process.
These two elements typically establish several features of
an Indoor Positioning System (IPS), e.g.
its accuracy,
deployment effort and coverage area. Next section presents
the main strategies to estimate the position of indoor
resources. Section 2.2 analyzes the technologies supporting
IPS and some of the well-known implementations. Section 
2.3 discuses various already implemented IPS, which
could be used to support loosely coupled work.

2.1 Indoor positioning location strategies

Indoor positioning strategies can be classiﬁed into four
categories:
triangulation, ﬁngerprinting, proximity, and
vision analysis [19, 20]. These strategies can eventually be
combined to enhance the positioning system.

2.1.1 Triangulation

This strategy takes advantage of the geometric properties
of triangles in order to estimate the position of a resource.
It considers a 2-D physical scenario. The estimation process 
uses three reference points with known geographical
coordinates. Then, using the direction or length of the
vector drawn between the location to be estimated (point
A) and the reference points (B, C, D), it is possible to
calculate the absolute position of point A [19]. This process
is particularly known as tri-lateration. There are three
methods typically used to calculate positions using trian-
gulation: signal strength,
time of arrival, and angle of
arrival [35]. The ﬁrst two requires counting on three reference 
points to calculate a position, and the last one
requires just two points. However, the angle of arrival
method has accuracy problems when the target object to be
located is far from the reference points [11]. The accuracy
of the three methods improves when improve the number
of reference points used for the estimation. An advantage
of these methods is they involve just a small setup effort in
order to start predicting the resources location.

2.1.2 Fingerprinting

This strategy calculates positions in a physical space by
comparing current measurement of a given set of signals,
with pre-measured data related to particular locations.
Typically,
the strategy involves two phases: an ofﬂine
training phase and an online estimation phase [20]. The
goal of the ofﬂine phase is to collect samples of location
related data (e.g. WiFi signals strength) for the whole
physical space that is considered for the estimation process.
The second phase uses such data to estimate the position of
resources in such scenario. This method could be quite

Pers Ubiquit Comput (2011) 15:365–376

367

accurate, but it
samples during the ofﬂine phase.

involves an important effort to collect

well-known IPSs are RADAR [3], Ekahau [14], Compass
[21], and Horus [40].

2.1.3 Proximity

This strategy involves the use of detectors (e.g. RFID tags)
that are located in known positions. When a target object is
identiﬁed by a detector, the coordinates of such position are
reported to a component in charge of mapping such data
into a location in the physical scenario. The accuracy of
this positioning strategy could be high, depending on the
detection technology that is used. Such accuracy depends
on the number of detectors deployed in the physical environment;
 the higher the density of detectors the higher the
precision. This strategy is useful not only to position or
track mobile users [6], but also to provide them personalized 
services [18] or support touch interactions [10]. RFID
tags can be used to store data rather than only IDs [24]. A
drawback of this strategy is the signiﬁcant effort required
for the setup process, which is usually high.

2.1.4 Vision analysis

This positioning strategy analyzes images received from
one or more capturing points (e.g. cameras located in the
tracking area) [7], in order to try identifying a tracked
object. Real-time analysis of images could be appropriate if
the number of objects to be tracked is small. Otherwise, it
is more efﬁcient to combine this strategy with some of the
previous ones, e.g. with triangulation, to reduce the number
of images required for the analysis. IPS using this positioning 
strategy involves an important effort and cost
during the setup phase.

2.2 Supporting technologies for IPS

There are several technologies that can be used to support
the indoor positioning mechanisms [19, 35]. Among them
are infrared, radio-frequency, Bluetooth, and sensor networks 
technologies.

Infrared systems need line-of-sight communication
interference
between transmitters and receivers without
between the light source and the target [8]. Typically, they
operate based on target objects detection (i.e. proximity)
with limited coverage. Some well-known IPSs using
infrared are Active Badge [36], Fireﬂy [12], and Optotrack
[27].

Radio-frequency positioning systems use mainly triangulation 
and ﬁngerprinting techniques [16]. Some of the
radio-frequency technologies used by IPS are radio-frequency 
identiﬁcation (RFID) and wireless local area network 
(WLAN). A well-known IPS using RFID is
WhereNet [38]. For the case of WLAN technology, some

Bluetooth-based positioning systems mainly use proximity 
for resource positioning [30]. Typically, a Bluetoothenabled 
device detects tags in indoor environments. Then,
utilizing pre-loaded location information the mobile user’s
device can determine where the person is located. A wellknown 
Bluetooth-based IPS is Topaz [37].

Sensor-based positioning systems typically involve a
large number of sensors, located in predeﬁned indoor places,
 in order to determine the position of a person or a
device [25, 26]. Positioning methods using sensor networks
are usually complex and expensive. A well-known sensorbased 
IPS is the ORP system [2].

The authors of this article consider, based on the above
presented evidence,
the most relevant supporting technologies 
which seems to be radio-frequency, particularly
the WLAN. The rationale behind this opinion is threefold.
 First, it provides a suitable signal threshold. Second,
it allows to deal with users’ mobility in a gracefully
manner. Third,
is anticipated this technology would
involve a reduced deployment effort. Next section discusses 
more in depth some of the WLAN-based IPS,
which could be used to support loosely coupled mobile
work.

it

2.3 Indoor positioning systems for loosely coupled

mobile work

There is a signiﬁcant number of WLAN-based IPS reported
in the literature, being RADAR [3] one the oldest infra-
structure-based systems. This system processes RF-derived
distances to determine positioning, sharing several similarities 
with the system proposed in this article, but lacks
the quick deployability feature. The bulk of the contribution 
of RADAR to this work is the use of a pre-stored RFsignal 
strength map built either by direct measurements or
by using a propagation model. Interesting particular contributions 
are the following: (1) study of different signal
propagation models and (2) empirical analysis on how
diverse factors impact measurement and prediction. In
particular, factors such as the number of measurement
points, the sampling rate, and the body orientation of the
person carrying the monitored device.

Horus [40] is another system that can be seen as an
evolution from RADAR which tries to reduce the prediction 
error. Horus uses a probabilistic approach instead of
the deterministic one found in RADAR. Probabilistic
approaches would deliver better results than deterministic
ones, according to [39]. Similarly to RADAR, Horus uses a
two-phase process: an ofﬂine phase for sample gathering
and calibration, and an online phase, the actual positioning
estimation task.

123

368

Pers Ubiquit Comput (2011) 15:365–376

Lastly, a very interesting work on the impact of
movement behavior on positioning is presented by Castro
and Favela [9]. Their work is framed in a hospital context
and proposes the use of neural networks to tackle the
problem generated by sudden movement of users. Their
work highlights that movement behavior related to the
monitored device has a signiﬁcant
impact on position
estimations.

The above-described initiatives emphasize the trade-off
between effort/cost and performance. The more the accuracy 
and precision the system delivers the more the train-
ing/calibration, or additional technology, it takes. For the
research presented in this article, an error in positioning
up to 6 m is considered acceptable; the system here proposed 
is envisioned to be used for human monitoring
applications.

In terms of the role that Wi-Fi technology may have for
positioning purposes, apparently there are strong limitations 
imposed by effort involved in deploying phases on
the level of accuracy that can be achieved. For example,
Ekahau Real Time Location System [14] exhibits moderate
accuracy, using WiFi signal strength ﬁngerprints, while
demanding signiﬁcant amount of time [15] and effort
during system set up and calibration phases. For the system
proposed in this article, the calibration and system setup
time are in the order of minutes. Another key difference
between Ekahau and the model here proposed is access to
information; in opposition to dissemination policies used in
academia, details of algorithms and signal propagation
model are not of public domain for systems like Ekahau.
The following paragraphs detail the model for positioning
developed under this research initiative, highlighting the
concepts both derived from and different to the mentioned
related work.

3 EDIPS positioning model

The solution proposed in this document relies, as some of
the systems mentioned in the previous section, on the
building and use of a signal strength blueprint. The key
differences between related work and the research here
presented lie on the performance during the blueprint
creation task; algorithms on using Wi-Fi signal strength
reference points to derive position estimations; and on
exhibiting the capability to use and share the same
blueprint among devices, indistinctly of the speciﬁc Wi-Fi
interface embedded in each device. As one could expect,
the downside for having such features is lower accuracy.
Nevertheless, as this system is designed for human
tracking and perception level, accuracy degradation is not
an issue as long as it does not increase more than a few
meters.

123

3.1 Ofﬂine phase––infrastructure and calibration

During this phase, the signal strength blueprint is created
and loaded into the device. Signal strengths are calculated
for each reference point. Only signal source are utilized for
these calculations, and radial decay is assumed for signal
propagation. While it may not be the best assumption when
complete information is available, we consider it a fair
assumption given the limited information known or
required a priori. Signal coverage for each signal is attenuated 
or ampliﬁed based on parameters related to each
device, setting, or reference point. Signal propagation is
modeled as adjusted by a constant parameter independent
of the emitting source. Again, it is a very basic model,
enough to provide suitable accuracy while enabling faster
setting and calibration phases.

In opposition to RADAR, where signal decay models
include the effect of walls, this effort only requires to be
aware of the physical dimensions of the 2D space containing 
the operations area. Details on the map and realism
are not relevant, only scale is considered. On the map,
positions of access points are registered (see Fig. 1) as well
as their MAC addresses. Then, the tasks described in the
following paragraphs are conducted in an automated
manner.

After the blueprint has been created, the discretization
process of the physical space is performed (Fig. 2). Equal
size cells are deﬁned and overlaid on the blueprint. Each
cell is given an a priori expected signal strength value
considering the reference points. The spirit of the segmentation 
approach is to have cells independently treated
in case different conditions affect them. Nevertheless, at
this step in the general process, all cells are treated in the
same manner.

Usually, signal decay modeling considers a large signal
strength sample dataset gathered at many locations in the
operations area. By doing this, system setup, calibration,
and training are signiﬁcantly impacted. In this work, system 
training step is completely removed; it favors quick
deployment at a reasonable lack of accuracy. Figure 3
shows the signal strength landscape after all reference

Fig. 1 2D map for the operations area showing the reference points
(circles)

Pers Ubiquit Comput (2011) 15:365–376

369

Fig. 2 Discrete cell model involving reference points (Wi-Fi access
points)

points’ signals have been integrated into the operations
area.

Regarding signal propagation and decay model, it is
considered that a function f(m) denoting the signal strength
value at a distance m exists. Such function is used to
determine the signal strength from source j detected at cell
i as follows:
SS Intensityi ¼ fðmÞ  Vj  KD  KA
where m corresponds to the distance between cells i and j,
Vj corresponds to a correction parameter for source j, KD
corresponds to a device correction parameter, and KA is
used to model environmental signal penetration. Unless
these scalar correction parameters are speciﬁed by the user,
they are given the unity value, i.e., 1.0.

In summary, input for ofﬂine phase of the positioning
system are the 2D map of the operations area, and location
and MAC address for each reference point. With this
information a basic, but extremely fast, signal strength
discrete landscape can be developed. The system allows the
end user to decide which Wi-Fi signal propagation model
to use. For example, the person setting up the system
choose one among the ones already developed in some of
the related work already described in the Introduction, or
she can develop her own theoretical/empirical one.

3.2 Online phase––operations

The online phase aims to keep updated positioning information 
about devices being tracked. At every time step it

Fig. 3 Estimated signal propagation and decay model
operations area

for

the

updates the data used for position estimation and calculates
the location. High variance in data sampled at this point
does not allow raw data to be used directly, so signal
strength data needs to be smoothed before used. By means
of incorporating the last n signal strength readings from
access points, weighting higher the recent ones than the
older ones, positioning gets updated. Based on preliminary
observations during the development of this system, it
seems that weighted average works better than standard
average. From now on, signal strength will refer to the
weighted average of signal strength.

The positioning model tries to ﬁnd the cells that minimize 
the error between the theoretical and sampled signal
strengths. So, each cell from the grid is processed determining 
what place minimizes the error, including all other
places given an error range. At the end of this iterative
process,
the system holds a set of candidates pro the
location of the device. The worst case happens when the set
of candidates are distributed in a non-continuous region in
the grid. Currently, the position is determined by calculating 
the corresponding center of mass from the set of
candidates.

3.3 Error weighting algorithm

This algorithm delivers a score (error) for each cell in the
grid. The cells having the lowest scores are the ones considered 
as the ones where the monitored device most likely
is located.

Let us have U representing the set of all the signal
sources used as reference points, and U0 the subset of cells
containing the strongest signals. For each X in U0, we call
Xm the sampled signal from source X and Xi the corresponding 
theoretical signal for source X at position i.
Then, the following formula is used to calculate the error
for cell i:
Errori ¼

Þ2f Xm; Xi

X

Þ

ð

Xm   Xi

ð

X2U0

instead of set U. Also,

Given signal precision decays as it gets weaker, the
calculation uses set U0
the
quadratic error is weighted by a function f that favors
stronger signals over the weaker ones. Quadratic error
was chosen because it provides better
treatment of
variance in the sample.

The above-described process can be improved with
problem domain restrictions/knowledge. For example,
people carrying/wearing the monitored device cannot displace 
over certain value in a given period of time. Consequently,
 error related to cells far from the current/last cell
can also be weighted, and impractical further locations can
be ignored. Finally, there is always space for introducing
movement behavior models to include movement patterns,

123

370

Pers Ubiquit Comput (2011) 15:365–376

frequent trajectories, etc. It is out of the scope of this article
and is part of future work.

4 Implemented indoor positioning system

EDIPS has a layered and fully distributed architecture.
Each mobile device running this positioning system is
autonomous and does not need the support of any other
component to perform the positioning estimation process.
The system may operate in a variety of devices, such as
PDAs, smartphones, tablet PCs, and notebooks, supporting
interactions among them, as well. Next sub-sections
explain the role and components of each layer of the EDIPS 
architecture (Fig. 4).

4.1 Hardware support

the WiFi

Since EDIPS uses WiFi not only to support the location
process but also the communication/interactions among
mobile workers,
interface becomes a crucial
component. The positioning process must consider that
WiFi antennas of different devices have different power. It
means the signal emitted by an access point may be perceived 
differently by different devices, like smartphones
and notebooks. Clearly, this situation affects the accuracy
of the position estimation process. In order to deal with this
issue EDIPS assigns a baseline signal strength for each
type of device. The baseline signal strengths were established 
empirically based on several tests conducted by the
authors using an important number of different devices. For
example, the signal strength perceived by a smartphone is
approximately the 70% of the signal strength perceived by
a notebook located in the same place. On the other hand,
signal strength differences among devices of the same type
even they do exist, they are not relevant in the position
estimation process.

If the user wants to improve the accuracy of the positioning 
prediction process of his/her device, the system
allows the users to tune the signal strength perceived
through a correction coefﬁcient that is particular for each
device. No particular setting of WiFi interfaces is required
to use the system.

If the device has an accelerometer, EDIPS is able to use
it to enrich the awareness mechanisms deployed through
the user interface, e.g. indicating that a nomadic worker is
stationary or on the move. The accelerometer does not
affect the accuracy of the location prediction process, and it
is an optional component.

4.2 Positioning system

The positioning system involves mainly two components: a
received signal strength (RSS) processor and a location
estimator. These components are in charge of performing
the estimation process described in Sect. 3. However, there
is a third component named HLMP API [31] that contributes 
to extend coverage area of the positioning system
and eases the mobile workers discovery process. Next we
present a brief explanation of such components.

4.2.1 RSS processor

During the ofﬂine phase this component is in charge of
establishing the reference points in the operations area.
This component also enables users to do tune the signal
strength perceived by the antenna of each mobile device.
During the online phase,
the RSS processor retrieves,
adjusts, records and informs the signal strengths perceived
from the reference points (i.e. the access points). This
information is then used by the location estimator component 
to predict the position of a resource (e.g. a mobile
worker).

4.2.2 Location estimator

During the ofﬂine phase, this component performs the
discretization of the physical space and characterizes the
signal strengths for each cell of the map. Such information
is stored in a XML ﬁle, which can be eventually shared
among mobile users. During the online phase, this component 
determines the most probable position of a target
object depending on the set of signals strength currently
received by the mobile device. This functionality is useful
not only to position resources but also to identify the
physical scenario where the user is located (e.g. the 3rd
ﬂoor of a particular building).

Location-based Applications

Layer 4: Software Application

4.2.3 HLMP API

Collaboration

Services

Awareness
Mechanisms

Layer 3: Location/Collaboration
Services

HLMP API

RSS

Processor

Location
Estimator

Layer 2: Positioning System

WiFi Interface

Accelerometer

Layer 1: Hardware Support

Fig. 4 EDIPS architecture

123

This component allows mobile workers keep connected
and interoperate through a Mobile Ad hoc Network (MA-
NET). Such infrastructure provides most communication
services required by nomadic users when performing
loosely coupled work [31], e.g. automatic formation of
a MANET, automatic detection of users, automatic

Pers Ubiquit Comput (2011) 15:365–376

371

services provided by this system. The application supports
the ofﬂine and online phases of the location process.
During the ofﬂine phase, it is possible to load a blueprint of
the area and mark the position of the access point(s). Such
activity represents the deployment of the system and it
takes (depending on the physical scenario) a few minutes.
During the online phase, the system presents the user
interface shown in Fig. 5. There, it is possible to see the
blueprint of the area in which the user is located and also
the presence of other three nomadic users. The icon labeled
as ‘‘me’’ is the local user, which is colored different to the
rest of the participants. The user icon’s shape also changes
depending on mobility status of the user. For example (in
Fig. 5), the local user and ‘‘user 1’’ are stationary, and the
other two users are on the move. ‘‘User 2’’ appears over an
arrow; it means such user is out of the screen portion
visualized by the local users. Shall the local user want to
ﬁnd ‘‘user 2’’, s/he has to walk in the direction indicated by
the arrow.

EDIPS also has an icons bar and a menu. The icons bar
allows the users to perform quick commands on the user
interface; particularly, the ﬁrst icon centers the blueprint
image in the upper left corner. The second icon centers the
image in the local user. The third icon shows users that are
around, but not visible in the portion of the blueprint shown
on the screen. The last icon hides all icons except the local
user icon.

The ‘‘maps’’ option in the EDIPS menu allows a person
to access functionality related to blueprint and signals
strength maps, e.g. to select the resolution of the blueprint
shown on the screen or to obtain the signals strength map
of a nomadic user near her. The option ‘‘options’’ in the
menu allows conﬁguring the visibility of a user as a

inclusion/exclusion of users, messages routing, and data
synchronization. Since this infrastructure provides messages 
routing, the positioning system’s coverage area could
be extended over the limits of the WiFi communication
range. For example, a mobile worker located in the 3rd
ﬂoor of a building could know the position of a partner
located in a contiguous ﬂoor. Since HLMP does not utilizes
the access points or centralized components, the use of this
infrastructure allows keeping the fully distribution paradigm 
proposed in the design of EDIPS. HLMP also helps to
implement awareness mechanisms that are required to
perform loosely coupled work, such as users’ presence,
users’ roles and public/private resources.

4.3 Location/collaboration services

This layer involves two components: (1) the collaboration
services that support the loosely coupled work and (2) the
awareness mechanisms that allow nomadic users become
aware of peers. Most collaboration services are based on
services provided by HLMP API. Examples of such collaboration 
services are work sessions’ management, ﬁle
transfer, and ﬂoor control. These components partially
support the indoor positioning systems. To exemplify a
situation where collaboration services support the IPS, let
us suppose the following work scenario. User A detects the
presence of user B in an indoor environment through a
service provided by HLMP API. However, user A is not
able to know the location of B, because A does not count
on the information of the physical environment where s/he
is located (i.e. the signals strength map and the blueprint of
the physical environment). In such case, EDIPS running in
the user A’s device utilizes the ﬁle transfer service to
obtain such information from B. Such information is
dynamically loaded and thus user A is now able to locate
user B.

The second component, i.e. the component that implements 
awareness mechanisms, provides feedback about the
surrounding ambient and its composition through the
device screen. Some of the awareness mechanisms already
implemented in EDIPS are the users’ presence and location,
 the map of the physical area where the user is located,
and the mobility status of each user (i.e. if the user is
stationary or on the move). The current implementation of
the system updates this awareness information almost in
real time. In order to shown more clearly these awareness
components, next section presents the user interface that
brings by default EDIPS.

4.4 Location-based software application

A simple location-based application was developed at
EDIPS’s upper layer in order to evaluate the positioning

Fig. 5 EDIPS main user interface

123

372

Pers Ubiquit Comput (2011) 15:365–376

member of the physical environment. For example, a
nomadic user could prefer to be invisible during some time
periods because s/he wants to avoid interruptions from
other users. HLMP API provides several visibility services,
and this menu option allows the user to active/deactivate
such services.

This application was used in two evaluation scenarios.
The ﬁrst one was focused on determining the accuracy of
the proposed indoor positioning model,
in addition to
measure the effort required to deploy the system. The
second scenario involved medical
interns and had two
goals: (1) to verify the effort required in the deployment
process, and (2) to determine suitability of the application
in supporting loosely coupled work conducted by medical
interns in a hospital setting.

5 Evaluation scenario I

The test of the system was conducted at the 3rd ﬂoor of the
Computer Science Department of the University of Chile,
in Santiago, Chile. This test was fourfold. First, the error in
meters was calculated for certain points of interest. A WiFi 
enabled device was used for both determining the signal
strength propagation model and testing the performance of
the system at the points of interest. No correction parameters 
were utilized, i.e., they all had value 1.0. Second, the
performance of the system was observed while varying the
device to be monitored. Third, correction capability of the
model and signal quality were studied while more reference 
points were added. Finally, the fourth is same as the
third, except this time the signal strength landscape was
improved based on ‘‘patching’’ weak signal spots detected
through the ongoing sampling.

At the testing place, there were already seven access
points covering an area of approximately 55 9 24 square
meters. Figure 6 presents the dimensions and the location
of the elements utilized for this testing task. Numbered
squares represent
locations where measurements were
conducted. The black star represents an additional reference 
point added during the second part of the test.
Circles represent the locations of reference points, i.e.,
access points. Given the estimated position for
the
monitored device may not be the same for different
sampling, about 20 samples were averaged for every
measurement point.

The device used during the ﬁrst part of the testing was a
HTC Diamond Touch, from now on referred to as HD1.
Table 1 presents the results for this part of the test. The
measurements obtained at two points presented in this table
are interesting. First, point 4 shows a small error, not surprisingly 
given its proximity to a reference point/access
point. Second, at point 6, the error is large given increased

123

Fig. 6 Floor plan for testing operations area showing locations were
different elements were placed

distance to reference points. This point is a candidate for
the third part of this test.

For the second phase of the test, a different Wi-Fienabled 
cell phone was used. HTC Diamond Touch 2, from
now on HD2, was selected. Among the results for this
component of the test, it was observed that for a given
measurement point, there was a difference of about 10 dB
between readings obtained with HD1 and HD2. This fact
suggested that the model should be adjusted.

In the case of EDIPS, the propagation model is corrected
by a constant modeled as intrinsic to the device, which
tends to balance factors like having antennas with different
gain among devices. HD2 received about 0.85 of the signals 
strength received by HD1, so the correction propagation 
model
adjusted
accordingly. Table 2 presents the results for error calculation 
for the different measurement points.

constant KD was

correction

Given the results obtained at point 6 from the two previous 
measurement sets, a new reference point was added
nearby, represented by the black star icon in Fig. 6. After
that new measurements were taken at point 6 drawing the
results shown in Table 3. These results highlight a positive
correlation between error and distance to reference points.
The last part of the test is similar to the previous one, but
it involves a different type of model correction. Point 9
exhibits a large error in previous sampling; even the signal

Table 1 Errors obtained for the different measurement points utilizing 
HD1 during the ﬁrst face of the test

Point

Device

Average error
(m)

Standard deviation
(m)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

HD1

HD1

HD1

HD1

HD1

HD1

HD1

HD1

HD1

4.61

2.79

8.74

1.11

3.26

22.05

4.44

9.17

7.99

0.61

0.21

1.38

0.00

0.64

6.01

0.40

0.79

4.23

Pers Ubiquit Comput (2011) 15:365–376

373

Table 2 Errors obtained for the different measurement points using
HD2 during the second face of the test

Point

Device

Average error
(m)

Standard deviation
(m)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

HD2

HD2

HD2

HD2

HD2

HD2

HD2

HD2

HD2

4.60

2.38

5.31

1.00

2.89

10.16

5.51

6.50

30.96

1.39

0.45

1.93

0.00

0.83

3.64

1.01

1.25

7.98

Table 3 New measurements obtained at point 6 after reference point
added nearby

Point

Device

Average error
(m)

Standard deviation
(m)

6*

6*

HD1

HD2

5.26

5.92

0.82

1.49

* Indicates that are new sensing conditions for a particular measurement 
point

strength received at that point is not weak. It leads us to
think the issue was at the model level. After several samples
were taken, the source correction parameter for the corresponding 
source was adjusted. Results after such adjustment 
improved signiﬁcantly for HD1, but not for HD2 (see
Table 4). We conjecture it was due to lack of reception of at
least three strong enough signals at that point.

6 Evaluation scenario II

A second evaluation scenario involved the 3rd and 4th
ﬂoors from the Computer Science Department of the
University of Chile (each ﬂoor having 1,320 square
meters). The building hosting these ﬂoors is similar to a
hospital in terms of space distribution and materials used in
its construction. The EDIPS deployment process took
12 min for the 3rd ﬂoor and 15 min for the 4th ﬂoor,

Table 4 New measurements obtained at point 9 after source correction 
calibration

Point

Device

Average error
(m)

Standard deviation
(m)

9*

9*

HD1

HD2

0.95

6.04

0.72

2.63

* Indicates that are new sensing conditions for a particular measurement 
point

involving only one person in such process. This is a minor
deployment effort compared to the effort required by other
IPS using ﬁngerprinting, proximity or even triangulation.
The goals for this evaluation were twofold: (1) to verify
the results obtained in the ﬁrst experimentation phase and
(2) to determine if the application could be useful to support

the loosely coupled work performed by medical
interns in a hospital.

This experience involved three medical interns. Each
medical intern had to ﬁnd a target object (e.g., a person
playing a medical specialist role) which was located in
either the 3rd or 4th ﬂoor of the building. This activity is
proper of a situation where the intern requires the opinion
from a medical specialist in order to conﬁrm a diagnosis.
Three stationary and three mobile target objects were
deployed in the evaluation scenario. To ﬁnd the targets,
each intern conducted six searching trials relying only on
the EDIPS system, while an external observer monitored
the interns’ activities at all times registering how long it
took them to accomplish the searching tasks.

The average error of the positioning system was 4–5 m
approximately, which is similar to the values obtained from
the ﬁrst evaluation process, described in the previous section.
All target objects were found in the ﬁrst try, i.e., the EDIPS
system provided a direct access to the searched resources.
Table 5 shows average and standard deviation values for the
time spent during the resources searching process.

Analyzing the results from each searching task, we can
appreciate from Table 5 that the standard deviation ranges
from 15 to 27%. We interpret these results as a conﬁrmation 
that the functionality provided by the EDIPS system is
appropriate to conduct the searching process, and therefore
the users do not require using additional personal capabilities 
(e.g. sense of orientation) to carry out such process.
The variance for
the time each intern spent on the
searching trials may be explained as a consequence from
the fact that walking speeds and routes followed to reach
target objects may vary from intern to intern.

Figures 7 and 8 correspond to the test labeled as ‘‘stationary 
target 2’’ in Table 5, where the intern looks for the
medical specialist who is located in a hospital room doing

Table 5 Time spent in searching for target resources

Stationary target 1

Stationary target 2

Stationary target 3

Mobile target 1

Mobile target 2

Mobile target 3

Search duration (Average) Standard deviation
103000
201500
105700
202400
105800
203700

2500
3400
2000
2300
1800
2700

123

374

Pers Ubiquit Comput (2011) 15:365–376

personal work. Figure 7 shows the EDIPS interface at the
moment when User 1 (i.e. the intern) ﬁnds User 2 or ‘‘Me’’
(i.e. the medical specialist). Figure 8 shows the same situation,
 but in the corresponding physical scenario.

Once this experimentation process concluded,

the
interns were interviewed to gather their feedback on the
usability and usefulness of this application. The responses
from the interns were totally aligned with the feedback
provided by the person monitoring the interns’ activities:
the EDIPS system is useful and usable to locate persons
within the domain of application conditioned by its
restrictions. While current results are still insufﬁcient to
make sound conclusions,
the authors consider there is
ample space to make the results improve signiﬁcantly with
further work.

7 Conclusions and future work

An encouraging development of an indoor positioning
system is presented in this article. The key characteristics
of this system are the following:

1. Quick building and setting up of this model. By setting
a preliminary estimation for signal strength propagation,
 much of
the implementation effort can be
reduced. Walls and more complicate signal propagation 
model utilized in other solutions are not considered 
here, improving performance for system start up.
Nevertheless, the model proposed can be extended
with as much detail as the user may need/desire,
making this solution a very ﬂexible one.

Fig. 7 Encounter between two users using EDIPS

123

Fig. 8 Encounter in the physical scenario

2. A great advantage of the system proposed is that it is
very ﬂexible regarding the signal strength blueprint; it
can be built on theoretical or empirical data, or a
combination of both.

3. Accuracy in positioning can be improved in an ondemand 
basis, minimizing the efforts involved in such
activity. In the results obtained during experimentation,
 it has been shown that error is within a few
meters. If error becomes greater than expected, the
system provides calibration mechanisms to reduce it.

The system proposed in this article has mechanisms to
deal with the variety of antennas that can be found in
different Wi-Fi interfaces. This design feature is crucial to
avoid ending up with a model tied to speciﬁc devices being
monitored.

In terms of accuracy, the granularity level exhibited by
the system developed may not allow tracking of objects
inside a room, but it is adequate enough for people positioning 
and awareness. For example, it can be used for
proximity awareness, people position tracking and monitoring,
 and situational awareness, among others.

Lastly, the work presented here opens encouraging paths
for further research and development. Some examples are
continue research on error reduction strategies and methods,
 improve the model based on few initial measurements,
develop a method to estimate the intrinsic constant associated 
to a device’s signal decay and propagation, explore
the impact of varying grid/cells dimension, also for memory 
and processing optimization, investigate the incorporation 
of inertial measurement units or inertial navigation
systems, or a combination of multiple navigation sensors.
All the previous ideas framed within the goals of this ini-
tiative: to have a system that is quickly deployable, easy to
modify and adapt, while still delivering enough accuracy
for indoor people tracking.

Pers Ubiquit Comput (2011) 15:365–376

375

Acknowledgments This work was partially supported by Fondecyt
(Chile), grant No 1110241, LACCIR grant R1210LAC002, and
Proyecto Enlace VID 2010 (University of Chile), Grant ENL 10/10.

References

1. Aldunate R, Ochoa SF, Pena-Mora F, Nussbaum M (2006)
Robust mobile ad hoc space for collaboration to support disaster
relief efforts involving critical physical infrastructure. ASCE J
Comp Civil Eng 20(1):13–27

2. An X, Venkatesha Prasad R, Wang J, Niemegeers I (2006) OPT:
online person tracking system for context-awareness in wireless
personal network. In: Proceedings of REALMAN’06, ACM
Press, Florence, pp 119–121

3. Bahl P, Padmanabhan VN (2000) RADAR: an in-building RFbased 
user location and tracking system. In: Proceedings of INFOCOM000,
 pp 775–784

4. Becker C, Durr F (2005) On location models for ubiquitous

computing. Pers Ubiquit Comput 9:20–31

5. Bortnikov E, Cidon I, Keidar I (2007) Nomadic service assignment.
 IEEE Trans Mob Comput 6(8):915–928

6. Bravo J, Herva´s R, Sa´nchez I, Chavira G, Nava S (2006) Visualization 
services in a conference context: an approach by RFID
technology. J Univers Comput Sci 12(3):270–283

7. Brumitt B, Meyers B, Krumm J, Kern A, Shafer S (2000)
technologies for intelligent environments. LNCS

Easyliving:
1927, pp 97–119

8. Casas R, Cuartielles D, Marco A, Gracia HJ, Falc JL (2007)
Hidden issues in deploying an indoor location system. IEEE
Pervasive Comput 6(2):62–69

9. Castro LA, Favela J (2008) Reducing the uncertainty on location
estimation of mobile users to support hospital work. IEEE Trans
Syst Man Cybern C Appl Rev 38(6):861–866

10. Chavira G, Bravo J, Nava-Diaz S, Rolo´n J (2010) PICTAC: a
model for perceiving touch interaction through tagging context.
J Univers Comput Sci 16(12):1577–1591

11. Chen JC, Wang YC, Maa CS, Chen JT (2006) Network-side
mobile position location using factor graphs. IEEE Trans Wireless 
Commun 5(10):46–52

12. Cybernet

Interactive (2010) Fireﬂy motion capture system,
http://www.cybernet.com/interactive/ﬁreﬂy/index.html. Accessed
Nov 2010

13. Dutta S, Mia I (eds) (2009) The global information technology
report 2008–2009: mobility in a networked world. World Economic 
Forum & INSEAD

14. Ekahau Inc. (2009) Real time location system (RTLS) overview.
http://www.ekahau.com/products/real-time-location-system/over
view.html. Accessed Nov 2010

15. Ekahau Inc. (2009) Wi-Fi RTLS: the myths vs. the facts http://
www.ekahau.com/images/stories/products/ekahau_myth_vs_facts.
pdf. Accessed Nov 2010

16. Gu Y, Lo A (2009) A Survey of indoor positioning systems for
wireless personal networks. IEEE Commun Surveys & Tutorials
11(1):13–32

17. Herskovic V, Ochoa SF, Pino JA, Neyem A (2008) General
requirements to design mobile shared workspaces. In: Proceedings 
of CSCWD’08. IEEE Press, pp 582–587

18. Herva´s R, Bravo J, Fontecha J (2010) A context model based on
ontological languages: a proposal for information visualization.
J Univers Comput Sci 16(12):1539–1555

19. Hightower J, Borriello G (2001) Location systems for ubiquitous

computing. IEEE Comput 34(8):57–66

20. Kaemarungsi K, Krishnamurthy P (2004) Properties of indoor
received signal strength for WLAN location ﬁngerprinting. In:
Proceedings 1st annual international conference on mobile and
ubiquitous systems (MobiQuitous’04), Boston, pp 14–23

21. King T, Kopf S, Haenselmann T, Lubberger C, Effelsberg W
(2006) COMPASS: a probabilistic indoor positioning system
based on 802.11 and digital compasses. In: Proceedings of the
ﬁrst ACM international workshop on wireless network testbeds,
experimental evaluation and characterization (WiNTECH), Los
Angeles

22. Li Y, Landay JA (2006) Exploring activity-based ubiquitous
computing: interaction styles, models and tool support. In: Proceedings 
of CHI’06, Montreal

23. Liu H, Darabi H, Banerjee P, Liu J (2007) Survey of wireless
indoor positioning techniques and systems. IEEE Trans Syst Man
Cybern C Appl Rev 37(6):1067–1080

24. Lo´pez-de-Ipin˜a D, Dı´az-de-Sarralde I, Garcı´a-Zubia J (2010) An
ambient assisted living platform integrating RFID data-on-tag
care annotations and twitter. J Univers Comput Sci 16(12):1521–
1538

25. Michel J, Christmann M, Fiegert M, Gulden P, Vossiek M (2006)
Multisensor based indoor vehicle localization system for production 
and logistic. In: Proceedings IEEE international conference 
on multi-sensor
intelligent
systems, Heidelberg, pp 553–558

fusion and integration for

26. Niculescu D (2004) Positioning in ad hoc sensor networks. IEEE

Netw Mag 18(4):24–29

27. Northen Digital Inc. (2010) Optotrak http://www.ndigital.com.

Accessed Nov 2010

28. Ochoa SF, Bravo G, Pino J, Rodriguez JF (2011) Coordinating
loosely-coupled work in construction inspection activities. Group
Decision and Negotiation, In press (to appear in 2011)

29. Pinelle D, Dyck J, Gutwin C (2003) Aligning work practices and
loosely coupled
In: Proceedings of Mobile HCI, Springer,

mobile technologies: groupware design for
mobile groups.
pp 177–192

30. Rodriguez M, Pece JP, Escudero CJ (2005) In-building location

using bluetooth. In: Proceedings of IWWAN’05

31. Rodrı´guez-Covili JF, Ochoa SF, Pino JA, Messeguer R, Medina
E, Royo D (2010) HLMP API: a software library to support the
development of mobile collaborative applications. In: Proceedings 
of CSCWD’10. IEEE Press, Shanghai, pp 479–484

32. Ruiz-Lopez T, Garrido JL, Benghazi K, Chung L, Noguera M
(2010) A survey on indoor positioning systems: foreseeing a
quality design. In: Proceedings of the international symposium on
distributed computing and artiﬁcial
intelligence, Valencia,
pp 374–381

33. Tentori M, Favela J (2008) Activity-aware computing for

healthcare. IEEE Pervasive Comput 7(2):51–57

34. Valdivia R, Nussbaum M, Ochoa SF (2009) Modeling a collaborative 
answer negotiation activity using IMS-based learning
design. IEEE Trans Education 52(3):375–384

35. Vossiek M, Wiebking L, Gulden P, Wiehardt J, Hoffmann C,
Heide P (2003) Wireless local positioning. IEEE Microwave Mag
4(4):77–86

36. Want R, Hopper A, Falcao V, Gibbons J (1992) The active badge

location system. ACM Trans Inf Syst 10(1):91–102

37. Weissman Z (2010) Indoor location. White paper. Tadlys Ltd.
http://www.tadlys.co.il/Pages/Downloads_content.asp?intGlobalId
=2. Accessed Nov 2010

38. Zebra Enterprise Solutions (2007) RTLS equipment control.
http://www.multisystems.com/pdf_lib/ds_rtls_equipment_control.
pdf. Accessed Nov 2010

39. Youssef M, Agrawala A (2004) On the optimality of WLAN
the

In: Proceedings

systems.

location

determination

of

123

376

Pers Ubiquit Comput (2011) 15:365–376

communication networks and distributed systems modeling and
simulation conference

40. Youssef M, Agrawala A (2005) The Horus WLAN location
determination system. In: Proceedings of MobiSys’05, ACM
Press, pp 205–218

41. Yuan Y, Zheng W (2009) Mobile task characteristics and the
needs for mobile work support: a comparison between mobile
knowledge workers and ﬁeld workers. In: Proceedings of the 8th
International Conference on Mobile Business,
IEEE Press,
pp 7–11

123

