An Ubiquitous Game for Providing Emotional Support   

to Hospitalized Children 

Ramon Cruzat1, Sergio F. Ochoa1, and Luis A. Guerrero2 

1 Computer Science Department, University of Chile 
{ramon.cruzat,sochoa}@dcc.uchile.cl 

2 CITIC Research Group, School of Computer Science and Informatics,   

Universidad de Costa Rica   

Luis.Guerrero@ecci.ucr.ac.cr 

Abstract. Kids under treatments that involve long stays at a hospital or health 
center tend to get bored or depressed because of the lack of social interaction 
with family  and friends. Such a situation also affects the evolution and effectiveness 
 of  their  treatments.  This  article  presents  a  mobile  ubiquitous  game 
called MagicRace, which allows hospitalized kinds to interact socially with one 
another, without putting to risk their sensitive health conditions. The game does 
not require a communication infrastructure at the hospital, but instead, it uses a 
mobile ad hoc network composed of the handhelds used by the kids to play.   

Keywords: Ubiquitous game, children's emotional support, healthcare. 

1 

Introduction 

Kids requiring long-term health treatments (e.g. for cancer, organ transplants, severe 
burns or chronic kidney disease) are located in special rooms, often in isolation. Their 
compromised  health  condition  increases  the  risk  of  being  infected  by  others  whom 
which they are in contact. Usually, physicians and nurses working in these areas, and 
also  personal  caregivers,  are  the  only  people  in  contact  with  these  children.   
Many  children  experience  severe  boredom,  and  often  become  depressed.  As  many 
have  to  spend  a  long  time  in  bed,  the  problem  is  exacerbated  and  challenging.  It  is 
well-known  that  the  patient’s  mood  affects  their  immunological  system,  in  turn,  affecting 
their ability to take well to a treatment and their illness in general [1]. In this 
scenario,  promoting  a  good  mood  and  feelings  of  well  being  seems  to  be  the  best 
practice.   

Several  studies  support  the  idea  that  social  networks  and  social  interactions  may 
enhance the quality of life of older adults and also children [2, 3, 4]. Some social applications 
have shown to be useful at addressing the isolation and anxiety that some 
feel when they are undergoing long treatments in hospitals and also at home. An example 
 of  these  applications  is  MEK  (Mobile  Exchange  of  Knowledge),  a  software 
tool that helps detect, in a ubiquitous way, patients or relatives with similar interests 
[5]. Another example is ePortrait -- an ambient display that allows family members to 

J. Bravo, R. Hervás, and M. Rodríguez (Eds.): IWAAL 2012, LNCS 7657, pp. 171–174, 2012. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012 

172 

R. Cruzat, S.F. Ochoa, and L.A. Guerrero 

share  pictures  [1].  Sharing  pictures,  family  members  help  boost  the  elder’s  mood, 
positively affecting their overall mental health condition. 

Trying  to  deal  with  the  stated  challenge  this  article  presents  an  ubiquitous  game 
called MagicRace, which embeds collaborative features as a way to allow social interactions 
among kids, and thus, improve their mood.   

Next section introduces the MagicRace application and its main components. Then, 

Section 3 presents the conclusions and the future work. 

2  MagicRace 

The game runs on handheld devices (particularly PDAs and smartphones) and uses a 
Mobile  Ad  hoc  Network  (MANET)  [6]  to  support  the  communication  among  these 
devices. Since the communication is wireless, the patients can interact with each other 
from their rooms, thus avoiding risk of possible contagious contact. 

This  game  involves  several  players  and  several  stages  depending  on  the  drivers’ 
expertise. The players can participate as independent drivers and also in teams. When 
they play in teams, each player receives points according to his/her final position in 
the race. The team members points obtained in the race are computed as part of the 
team score and the team that obtains the highest score is the winner. Therefore, it is 
important  that  the  participants  have  a  team  strategy  to  race,  thus,  increasing  their 
chances of winning the race. 

Four teams were predefined in the game and they were identified by the color of 
the cars (teams blue, green, red and orange). Each team may have many participants. 
All cars participating in the race start the competition with a certain amount of energy, 
and as the car moves it can gain or lose energy depending on the driver’s actions. For 
example, every time the car goes off the road or moves in the opposite direction, it 
loses energy. On the contrary, if the driver does not make mistakes for a certain time 
period, the energy of his/her car increases until reaching the maximum. The amount 
of energy determines the maximum speed that a car can reach. 

During the different stages of a race, certain “magic objects” appear on the circuit. 
When the car passes over one of these objects, its behavior changes. Therefore, these 
objects can help or harm, not only the player, but also the team. The game considers 
four types of  magic objects depending on the effect these  objects produce: personal 
positive, personal negative, team positive and team negative. Objects in the first two 
categories affect just one player and those in the last two categories affect the whole 
team. Figure 1 shows the positive personal magic objects. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 1. Magical objects in the "positive personal" category 

The stars increase the speed of the car. The ghost makes the player invisible to other 
players for five seconds. The fruits allow a car to recover part of the lost energy. 

 

An Ubiquitous Game for Providing Emotional Support to Hospitalized Children 

173 

The first-aid kit lets you recover all lost energy. These magic objects appear randomly 
during the race, therefore making every race different from the previous one, even if 
the same circuit is used. The objects appear more frequently in later stages of a race, 
and in particular, the positive ones appear more frequently than the negative ones. The 
current prototype has 30 different scenarios or circuits. Figure 2 shows an example of 
the interface of the prototype. 

 

 

                    (a)                                            (b)                                            (c)                                          (d) 

Fig. 2. The MagicRace game interface 

The game user interface includes four tabs that are shown at the bottom area of that 
interface: connection, users list, setup game, play. These tabs group functionality or 
services provided by the game. 

The  first  tab  (Fig.  2.a)  includes  the  functionality  that  allows  potential  players  to 
connect to a MANET. The MANET represents the shared space where the users can 
see each other and interact via a chart to organize the racing teams, agree to circuit 
use in a race and discuss racing strategies with teammates.   

The second tab of the game user interface shows a kind of “buddy list”, where all 
users  currently  connected  to  the  MANET  appear.  The  buddy  list  also  indicates  the 
quality of the connection between the local user and the rest of the people. Such quality 
is determined by the number of hops required to reach a certain user. Through the 
buddy list the users can perform point-to-point interactions and also share files. 

The parameters of the game can be configured using the functionality shown in the 
third  tab  (Fig.  2.b  and  2.c);  e.g.  the  teams  that  participate,  the  stages  involved  in   
the game, and the complexity level of the game. The last tab (Fig. 2.d) is for starting 
the  game.  In  that  screenshot  we  can  see  two  teams  participating  in  a  race,  and  the 
white square indicates which car is being controlled by the local user.   

The  position  of  a  player  during  the  race  is  updated  as  it  passes  through  certain 
checkpoint. The checkpoints are represented by orange cones. Each race consists of 
several  laps  around  the  circuit.  The  difficulty  of  the  game  is  directly  related  to  the 
speed at which cars move. 

The first user who joins a particular race becomes the host of that race. The rest of 
the users connected to the MANET can choose to create a new race or join an existing 
one. The host user is the only one able to configure the race. 

174 

R. Cruzat, S.F. Ochoa, and L.A. Guerrero 

3 

Conclusions and Future Work 

Hospitalized kids are usually affected by changing moods due to their social isolation 
produced by treatments; particularly when these treatments are drawn out over time, 
or the kids must be remain in his/her room. Their mood affects body defenses, hence 
the importance of promoting healthy mood boosting environments.       

To deal with this issue, this article proposes the use of an ubiquitous game, called 
MagicRace,  that  runs  hardware  constrained  devices  connected  through  a  MANET. 
The game allows social interactions among hospitalized kids through various mechan-
isms: playing, chatting and sharing file (e.g. pictures). The usability and performance 
of  the  game  was  preliminary  evaluated.  The  obtained  results  indicate  the  game  is 
ready to be used in a real setting involving hospitalized children. This is exactly the 
next  step  of  this  initiative.  We  expect  that  this  collaborative  ubiquitous  game  could 
serve as an emotional support for these kids. 

We are also continuing the process of evaluating and improving the game performance;
 particularly the network communication support, to extend the physical scenarios 
in which this game can be used. 

Acknowledgments. This paper has been partially supported by FONDECYT (Chile), 
grant 1120207 and by LACCIR, grant R1210LAC002, and also by the CITIC-UCR 
(Centro  de  Investigación  en  Tecnologías  de  la  Información  y  Comunicación  de  la 
Universidad de Costa Rica). 

References 

[1]  Cordove, M.J., Giese-Davis, J., Golant, M., Kronnenwetter, C., Chang, V., McFarlin, S., 
Spiegel, D.: Mood disturbance in community cancer support groups: The role of emotional 
suppression and fighting spirit. Journal of Psychosomatic Research 55, 461–467 (2003) 

[2]  Giles, L.C., Glonek, G.F., Luszcz, M.A., Andrews, G.R.: Effect of social networks on 10 
year survival in very old Australians: the Australian longitudinal study of aging. J. of Epidemiology 
and Community Health 59(7), 574–579 (2005) 

[3]  House, 

J.S.,  Landis,  K.R.,  Umberson,  D.:  Social 

relationships  and  health. 

Science 241(4865), 540–545 (1988) 

[4]  Joinson, A.N.: Looking up or ‘Keeping up with’ people? Motives and Uses of Facebook. 

In: Proc. of CHI 2008, pp. 1027–1036. ACM Press, New York (2008) 

[5]  Monclar, R., Tecla, A., Oliveira, J., Souza, J.: MEK: Using spatial-temporal information to 
improve  social  networks  and  knowledge  dissemination.  Information  Sciences 179(15), 
2524–2537 (2009) 

[6]  Rodríguez-Covili,  J.F.,  Ochoa,  S.F., Pino,  J.A.,  Messeguer,  R., Medina,  E.,  Royo,  D.:  A 
Communication Infrastructure to Ease the Development of Mobile Collaborative Applications.
 Journal of Network and Computer Applications 34(6), 1883–1893 (2011) 

