A MAC Protocol for Underwater

Sensors Networks

Rodrigo Santos1(B), Javier Orozco1, Sergio F. Ochoa2, Roc Messeguer3,

and Gabriel Eggly1

1 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computers, IIIE,

UNS-CONICET, Bah´ıa Blanca, Argentina

ierms@criba.edu.ar

2 Computer Science Department, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile
3 Computer Science Department, Universidad Politecnica de Catalunya,

Barcelona, Spain

Abstract. Underwater sensor networks are becoming an important
ﬁeld of research, because of its everyday increasing application scope.
Examples of their application areas are environmental and pollution
monitoring (mainly oil spills), oceanographic data collection, support for
submarine geo-localization, ocean sampling and early tsunamis alert. It
is well-known the challenge that represents to perform underwater communications 
provided that radio signals are useless in this medium and
a wired solution is too expensive. Therefore, the sensors in these network 
transmit their information using acoustic signals that propagate
well under water. This data transmission type bring an opportunity, but
also several challenges to the implementation of these networks, e.g., in
terms of energy consumption, data transmission and signal interference.
Few proposals are available to deal with the problem in this particular
application scenario, and these proposals does not address properly the
transmission of underwater acoustic signals. In order to help advance
the knowledge in the design and implementation of these networks, this
paper proposes a MAC protocol for acoustic communications between
the nodes based on a self-organized time division multiple access mechanism.
 The proposal is still preliminary and it has only been evaluated in
the laboratory; however, it represents a highly promising behavior that
make us expect interesting results in real-world scenarios.

Keywords: Acoustic sensor networks · Collaborative systems · Opportunistic 
routing

1 Introduction

The ocean covers 71 percent of the Earth’s surface and contains 97 percent of
the planet water, yet more than 95 percent of the underwater world remains
unexplored. UNESCO states that over 90 percent of the earth habitable space
is within the ocean, and near 80 percent of all life is under the ocean surface.
c(cid:2) Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
J.M. Garc´ıa-Chamizo et al. (Eds.): UCAmI 2015, LNCS 9454, pp. 394–406, 2015.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-26401-1 37

A MAC Protocol for Underwater Sensors Networks

395

There are quite dramatic projections stating that by the year 2100 more than
half of the marine species may stand on the brink of extinction [1]. This shows
only some of the several reasons that we have to deploy underwater technology
that help us study several phenomena that aﬀect our lives and the health of our
planet.

In this scenario, the underwater sensor networks could provide valuable information 
that helps us address some of these challenges [2]. However, underwater
radio communications are practically unfeasible, specially in the ocean because
radio signals suﬀers a strong attenuation, limiting the eﬀective communication to
a few meters. Acoustic signals instead are capable of traveling for long distances,
depending on the power used for the transmission and the physical characteristics 
of the medium. Therefore the communication feasibility depends on several
variables, such as the carrier communication frequency, point to point distance,
the chemical composition of water, the topology of the seaﬂoor, the temperature
of the water, the depth of sensors placement and the spreading pattern.

Underwater acoustic sensors networks (UWASN) have several challenges that
should be considered for a successful implementation. The ﬁrst one is related to
the lossy nature of the channel. Although acoustic signals can propagate well
beneath the water, they suﬀer an important attenuation mainly produced by
absorption; and this attenuation is proportional to the distance and the frequency 
of the signal. There are some other factors contributing to the attenuation,
 like the scattering and reverberation in the surface, because wind moves
the reﬂection point in the surface. There is also reﬂection in vessels that may
introduce Doppler eﬀect in the signal. Moreover, the geometric spreading of the
signal produces path loss in the transmission; regardless we are using spherical
(that is common in deep water) and cylindrical spreading (that is more common
in shallow water).

The second challenge refers to the nature of the acoustic signal used for
transmitting the information. There are several man-made noises present in the
ocean, and specially in the surf zone where it is usual to have a higher density,
vessel traﬃc, sport activities and city noise. Another source of noise is provided
by the environment itself; i.e., waves, winds, rains, animals and even seismic
noise that may interfere with data transmission in the acoustic sensor network.
The third challenge is related to the multi-path characterization of the signals.
 Diﬀerent signals may interfere between each other by means of the intersymbol 
interference. The vertical links usually have little dispersion, so it is not
common to have multi-path interference; however, in horizontal channels the
spread may be signiﬁcant and therefore diﬀerent messages may interfere among
them.

The fourth challenge to be addressed is the energy consumption. Underwater 
sensor networks are battery-powered, which also represents a mayor concern
during its operation. The energy consumption during standby and data reception 
is low in commercial modems, but in data transmission the consumption
depends on the distance that the signal should travel. The relationship between
transmission power vs distance follows a quadratic function. One way to save

396

R. Santos et al.

the energy in these networks is by transmitting at a higher baud rates for short
times, limiting the operating range. On the other hand, transmissions through
long distances require high power and lower baud-rates; thus, high data volumes
result incompatible with large distances under the power consumption point of
view. Considering that in sensor networks the data volume is usually low, and
assuming average ocean parameters, the speed of sound in the water is closed
to 1.5 km/s, the carrier frequency is between 20 kHz and 70 kHz for distances
larger than 1 km. The operating range to maintain sustainable communications
at reasonable baud rate, and with low corrupted data rates, is limited to 2 Km
point-to-point. The variance in the transmission times introduces uncertainty,
therefore the round trip time for a message is usually pessimistically evaluated
degrading the performance of the system.

There is a transversal component in these sensor networks that can be used
to help address most of these challenges. This component is the medium access
control (MAC) protocol used by the UWASN. Considering the needs and the
challenges to implement underwater acoustic sensors networks, and the limitations 
that the current approaches for implementing MAC protocol for this type
of networks, this paper proposes an extended medium access control protocol
based on Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA), but speciﬁcally for UWASN.
The transmission mechanism is inspired in the self-organized TDMA [3] and the
ad-hoc self-organized TDMA [4]. However, its operation is simpler than the previous 
ones, involving only two phases for the conﬁguration and operation. For
the slot selection process it uses a simple carrier sense multiple access/collision
avoidance (CSMA/CA) mechanism.

The rest of the paper is organized in the following way. In Sect. 2 a short
review of previous work is presented. In Sect. 3 the proposed MAC protocol is
presented. In Sect. 4 the evaluation process of this proposal is presented and
discussed. Finally, in Sect. 5 we presents the conclusions and future work.

2 Related Work

This kind of networks has several aspects to consider, which are not yet deﬁned,
like the physical layer selection, link layer protocols, and network and transport 
layer protocols. The literature shows three main approaches to implement 
medium access control protocol (MAC): frequency division multiple-access
(FDMA), carrier sense multiple access with collision avoidance (CSMA/CA) and
time division multiple access (TDMA). The ﬁrst one is not suitable for underwater 
acoustic transmission, due to the narrow bandwidth in underwater acoustic
channels and the vulnerability of limited band systems to fading and multi-path.
CSMA/CA has been proposed in previous work, but it is limited by the hidden
station problem and the high propagation and variable delay. Long time periods
are needed in each message transmission to guarantee that there has been no
collisions degrading the overall performance. Finally, the TDMA schemes have
problems with the synchronization, latency and unused bandwidth. However, for
real-time transmissions it is the only option that can provide bounded delays,

A MAC Protocol for Underwater Sensors Networks

397

although it is necessary to leave several slots empty. In this section we discuss
previous work mainly related to the medium access mechanism and its appropriateness 
for being used in underwater acoustic sensors networks.

In [5] the authors proposed the Multiple Access Collision Avoidance (MACA)
protocol based on the use of short messages request to send (RTS) and clear
to send (CTS), followed by the sequence of messages DATA and ACK. This
mechanism has been successfully used in the Seaweb project [6]. Before sending
data, the node should reserve the channel by issuing a RTS, and after that it
has to wait for the CTS answer. Nearby stations also listen the request and
wait for the answer. In the case that a neighbor station does not listen the CTS
answer, it means there is no interference in the receiver, and that the transmission
may proceed solving in this way the exposed problem. Any station, other than
the original RTS sender, on hearing CTS will defer its transmission. In case of
collisions of RTS messages, the nodes use a binary backoﬀ algorithm to solve the
conﬂict.

In [7], the authors extend the MACA protocol and named it MACA for wireless 
(MACAW). They propose a less aggressive backoﬀ algorithm for the link
layer introducing the sequence RTS-CTS-DATA-ACK. In lightly loaded scenarios 
this mechanism has less performance, but with high loads it has much better
throughput and fairer allocation.

In [8] another MACA-based protocol is proposed. In this case, the Floor
Acquisition Multiple Access protocol requires that every transmitting station
should acquire the ﬂoor control (in a wireless channel), before sending any data
packet. Both the sender and the receiver should perform the collision avoidance
to guarantee the control of the channel.

In [9], the authors introduce the UW-MAC for acoustic underwater sensor
networks. The MAC scheme is based on CDMA with a novel closed-loop distributed 
algorithm to set the optimal transmit power and code length to minimize
the near-far eﬀect. The algorithm compensates the multi-path eﬀect by exploiting 
the time diversity in the underwater channel, thus achieving high channel
reuse and low number of packet retransmissions. The protocol works both in
deep and shallow water, and involving static or mobile nodes.

SO-TDMA [3] and ASO-TDMA [4] use a self organized TDMA scheme for the
access control. However, these protocols were thought for VHF radio frequencies
and they are used for the localization of vessels and ships in the ocean.

The UWSO-TDMA proposed in this paper is a simple mechanism that uses
TDMA. In contrast to the other MAC protocols, this approach can be used for
real-time communications, as it is possible to bound the transmission delay.

3 Description of the UWSO-TDMA Protocol

The proposed protocol is based on the predictability of TDMA, rather than
on the probabilistic CSMA/CA approach. Time is divided in slots, where a
message fully occupies one time slot. Like in SO-TDMA [3], UWSO-TDMA uses
a structured access channel for slot assignment. The slots allocation is performed

398

R. Santos et al.

in a distributed way, where each station/node in the network chooses the best
slot to transmit. This is a decentralized scheme where nodes are responsible
for sharing the communication channel and the synchronization. In the case of
the UWASN, GPS information is not available under the water, therefore the
synchronization source is usually a sonobuoy anchored in the region that is in
charge of synchronizing the clocks of the underwater nodes. The sonobuoy uses
the UTC time for synchronizing the network.

Since acoustic signals are attenuated, not all the sensors listen to the
sonobuoy synchronization slot. When a station is not within the sonobuoy transmission 
range, it is synchronized in a second phase by an already synchronized
node. To do this, the frame is divided in m sub-frames (SF ). Within the ﬁrst
sub-frame, SF1, only the nodes listening to the sonobuoy can transmit. In SF2,
the nodes at two hops of the SB can transmit. Nodes in SF2 are synchronized by
nodes in SF1. With this hierarchical distribution, nodes in SFj are synchronized
by nodes in SFj−1. As nodes in SFi with i > 1 are not in direct contact with
the SB, their messages have to be aggregated by nodes in previous SF . Figure 1
shows the frame structure.

Fig. 1. Frame Structure (from [4])

The slot length is deﬁned according to the data rate and message length.
Based on these variables, the number of available slots in a frame are determined,
NAF . The number of slots in a sub-frame, Nk is a function of the nodes within
that hop. Finally, the number of hops or sub-frames are deﬁned according to the
expected physical deployment of the UWASN.

Initialization

3.1
Figure 2 presents the general ﬂowchart for the this phase. For ease of understanding,
 details on the slot selection process are not represented. In this phase the
nodes scan one frame to locate idle time slots and check the existence of neighbor
nodes. The sonobuoy transmits in the ﬁrst slot of the frame. In that slot, this
node sends the current time so nodes listening to this ﬁrst slot can determine
their distance to the sonobuoy. However, some nodes probably are out of the
transmission radio of the sonobuoy; for these cases, the synchronization is made
as explained before, through nodes in diﬀerent sub-frames, SFi.

Figure 3 presents an example with a possible distribution of nodes in a
UWASN. The sonobuoy is noted as SB and it is the center of the red circle

A MAC Protocol for Underwater Sensors Networks

399

Initialization

Listen

SB

No SB synch

SB synch Message

synch message

Listen

node synch

next SF

No synch 
message

Listen Synch
Select Empty

Slot

Wait ACK

ACK

Data Transmission

Fig. 2. Initialization Flowchart

that marks the communication range of the SB. As can be seen, two nodes may
be in direct contact with the SB, but do not between them (e.g., nodes 1 and
2). Weather they are in direct contact or not, these nodes should select diﬀerent
slots within the ﬁrst sub-frame to avoid both collisions and receiver collisions in
the SB. In the next hop area, dotted red circle, there are 3 more nodes. Like in
the previous case, even if they are at similar distance from the SB, that is within
the second hop, they have diﬀerent data paths. A message starting in node 5,
may need to go through nodes 4 and 2 before reaching the SB. Instead, node 3
is within range of node 2, so messages beginning in node 3 pass through node
2 before reaching the SB. This example shows that even if nodes 3, 4 and 5 are
within a distance of two communication radios from the SB, the amount of hops
needed to reach such a node is diﬀerent for each one.

400

R. Santos et al.

During this phase, nodes build the network topology to determine the path
towards the SB. Each node in the system selects a slot in the frame and informs
its depth, distance to the SB (if it is within one hop) or the accumulated distance
and the path towards it. In the example of Fig. 3, node 4 informs the distance
to the SB and the path through node 2. In that way, node 5 can synchronize its
clock and determine its own distance to the SB and path.

The selection of the slot may require several steps to avoid collisions. To
facilitate this process, UWSO-TDMA divides the frame in sub-frames like in [4].
The amount of available slots in a sub-frame is a designer decision, based on the
amount of expected nodes in each region of the network. The sub-frame should
have at least the same amount of available slots as nodes within the area.

Slot Selection Process. The slot selection process uses a collision avoidance
algorithm. After listening to the synchronization node, for example the SB, each
node scans the sub-frame for an available slot and selects one. In the following
frame, the nodes transmit in the selected slot. After this, three things may
happen:

– There is no collision at all. In the next frame, nodes in the previous subframe 
or the SB (if the node is in direct contact with it) will acknowledge the
selection.

– Two or more nodes within transmission range select the same slot. They will
detect the collision and stop. Then, they follow a backoﬀ algorithm to select
another slot.

– Two or more nodes are not within transmission range, so they do not detect
the collision in the previous nodes sub-frame. In this condition, the nodes will
not receive the acknowledgment, therefore they assume that there has been a
collision and follow a backoﬀ algorithm to select a new slot.

During the backoﬀ, the nodes select one slot randomly from the set of available 
ones in the sub-frame. As there is no master allocating the slots and to avoid
a long selection process, sub-frames have more available slots than nodes in the
area. The probability of two nodes selecting the same slot is equal to 1/n2, where
n is the amount of idle slots in the sub-frame at the moment of the selection. As
there is at least one available slot after all nodes have selected their own slot,
the worst case is when two nodes compete for three slots. In this situation, the
probability of collision is 0.11. If two slots are left idle, the probability decays to
0.06 and if three slots are left empty to 0.04.

The SB is in charge of reinitializing the network periodically. This process is
repeated to shuﬄe the slot assignments and to facilitate the incorporation of new
nodes. As frames are synchronized with the UTC and begins with the minute,
the period is a designer decision based on the conditions of the UWASN. For
example, in networks deployed in places with strong currents is probable that
nodes even if anchored to the bottom are moved. The reinitialization procedure 
facilitates also the redeﬁnition of the nodes in charged of aggregating the
information from lower SF nodes.

A MAC Protocol for Underwater Sensors Networks

401

1

5

SB

4

2

3

Fig. 3. Case 1: Deployment and transmission ranges

3.2 Data Transmission

Figure 4 shows the ﬂowchart for the data transmission phase. In this phase, nodes
transmit their data in the selected slot together with the distance to the SB and
depth. As all nodes within range receive this information, they are able to keep an
updated version of the network topology. As underwater transmission is prone to
have data corruption, each message should be acknowledged after being received
without corruption, by the synchronizing nodes in the previous sub-frames. If a
message is not acknowledged, the sender retransmits it in the next frame. In the
case a new message is generated, the information is aggregated or the old message
is discarded, but this situation is ﬂagged, so upstream nodes may notice the
missing one. At the beginning of every frame, nodes wait for the synchronization
message. If this message is not received with the acknowledgments of previous
messages, the nodes in the sub-frame should assume that the synchronization
node is out of work, and the backup synchronization node should be used if
available. If there is not a backup, the node goes into the initialization phase.

In the example presented in Fig. 3, the node 5 is the last node. Its messages
have to go through nodes 4 and 2 to reach the SB. In this case, node 4 has to
aggregate the information of node 5 in its own message and in the same way node
2 aggregates the information from nodes 4 and 5 in its own message. Figure 5
presents a case where more nodes are incorporated. In this case, the path from
6 to the SB is through node 1. However, as can be seen, the node 7 listens to
nodes 5 and 6. Node 5 is in the third sub-frame (SF), but node 6 is in the second
one. The aggregation process is made only by nodes in the previous SF. When
there is more than one node in the previous SF that listens to the messages
from lower SF nodes, only one node aggregates and forwards the information to
the next SF. The other nodes keep a copy of the information as backup, in case
there is a failure in the transmission. Even if the path with the shortest delay is

402

R. Santos et al.

Data transmission

Synch node

present

Previous msg

ACK

Backup synch

node?

Retransmit aggregated 

message

Synch lower SF nodes

Modify topology

Connection lost
Intialization phase

Transmit aggregated 

message

Synch lower SF nodes

 Listen lower SF 

messages

Fig. 4. Data transmission ﬂowchart

6

7

5

1

SB

4

2

3

Fig. 5. Case 2: Deployment and transmission ranges

preferable, this scheme suppose the use of only one node as gateway to the next
SF. The idea is that the ﬁrst listened node in the SF is in charge of aggregating
the information. As the slot allocation procedure is repeated in each periodic
initialization phase, the nodes doing the aggregation are also changed.

A MAC Protocol for Underwater Sensors Networks

403

Fig. 6. Topology of the network in case 2

Figure 6 presents the topology of the UWASN represented in Fig. 5. The dotted 
lines represent the diﬀerent sub-frames used in the transmission of messages.
As can be seen, if node 6 disappears, the network will be reconﬁgured and node 7
will be in a new sub-frame behind node 5. In the same way, if node 4 is turned
oﬀ, node 5 will send its messages through node 7.

3.3 Delay Management

The propagation speed of underwater acoustic signals is quite slow in relation
to the amount of information that can be transferred through the air. In the
case of encoding messages at 9600 bits/s, in the time required for the signal to
cover 1.5 km (it is one second), the transmitter should send 1200 bytes. Usually,
messages are much shorter, so they will require only a few milliseconds. This
fact introduces an important synchronization problem between sources and destinations 
if acknowledgments are required for each message. The UWSO-TDMA
solves this problem using slot identiﬁcation and time stamps in every message.
In this way, even if the round trip of a message requires an important delay, it
can be handled.

4 Evaluation Process

In this section we evaluate the performance of the MAC proposal using the
example introduced in the previous section. We compare the general behavior
of our proposal with the one of the MACA-U protocol [10]. For this evaluation
process we assume that each node has an acoustic range equal to 500 meters,
the carrier frequency is set to 40 Khz [11] and the transmission data rate to
9600 bits/s. Each slot takes 167 ms for 160 bytes. Figure 7 shows the frame
structure after the initialization phase for the network topology represented in
Fig. 6.

404

R. Santos et al.

Fig. 7. Slot allocation in the example frame

As can be seen there are 10 slots used with 3 empty ones. The empty slots
are used to reduce the probability of collisions in the selection slot process.
The complete frame is transmitted in 1.67 s. In ASO-TDMA and SO-TDMA,
the frame has 2650 slots and takes a whole minute. Nodes in the network have
access to a GPS or UTC time, so they can synchronize their clocks and capture
the beginning of the frames in the ﬁrst instant of every minute. In the case of
UWASN, only the sonobuoy has access to the UTC. Frames usually have less
slots due the number of nodes are known.

Frames can start with diﬀerent periodicity, for example every 10 s. In this
case, the power demand (i.e., energy consumption) of the communication system
in the node will be less than 20 %. After the initialization phase, a message from
the farthest node (in our case, node 7), requires three frames to reach the SB
or 30 s. The ACK message is issued in three steps. First, node 6 acknowledges
the reception of the message to node 7 and in the next frame, then node 1
acknowledges node 6 in the following frame, and ﬁnally the SB acknowledges
the reception of the message from node 1. In steady state it is possible to send a
message every 10 s, receiving the acknowledgment in the following 10 s, and the
general utilization ratio of the network is below 20 %.

In case of MACA-U protocol, the nodes can transmit whenever they have
information available and they can lock the access to the acoustic channel, by
issuing a RTS-CTS message with the next hop in the network. In this case, a
timer is set with both, the time needed to send the message and the maximum
delay for the message to reach the next node. Considering that the underwater
acoustic signal propagates at 1.5 km/s, the time needed to reach the farthest
possible node is equal to 0.333 s; therefore, the maximum round trip τmax is
equal to 0.667 s. The same time slot is kept for comparison purposes 0.167 s. In
case node 7 has a message to send, it will send an RTS message and wait for
τmax + tslot = 0.834 s. If in this time this node receives a CTS message, then it
gains access and transmits its message. So, the total time needed by node 7 to
send its message to the sonobuoy is 3 s without collisions. However, node 7 may
be delayed by collisions with nodes 5 and 6. In this case, and assuming only one
collision with each one, the message from node 7 will only be transmitted to node
6 after 3 s. Node 6 can be delayed by collisions with node 1 and 7. Therefore,
considering again only one collision with each one, the message needs another
3 s to reach node 1. In the last hop, node 1 may have collisions with nodes 6, 2
and the sonobuoy, and like in the previous cases, the message will be delayed for

A MAC Protocol for Underwater Sensors Networks

405

another 4 s. The end-to-end transmission time for a message originating in node
7 is the sum of the partial delays, i.e., 10 s.

This simple example shows that the complexity of a collision avoidance algorithm 
for transmission of information in networks with important delays may
compromise its performance severely. Another important aspect is that the delay
is not deterministic, showing great variations according to the network load.
Instead, once the slot selection process is done, the TDMA approach guarantees 
a constant latency and transmission delay, making the message propagation
predictable.

5 Conclusions and Future Work

In this paper we have proposed the UWSO-TDMA MAC protocol for underwater
acoustic sensor networks. The mechanism is based on a TDMA protocol, but
without including a master node or a ﬁxed schedule for the nodes. In fact,
each node selects the slot in which it will transmit in a distributed way. Time
synchronization is kept through a sonobuoy that picks up the time from GPS
or Galileo system. Nodes that are not within the sonobuoy transmission range,
synchronize their clocks through retransmitting nodes. As the protocol is based
on TDMA, transmission delay and latency are bounded, and the network can
be used for transmitting messages with real-time constraints.

Although this proposal is still being evaluated, the preliminary results are
encouraging. Addressing the data transmission in UWASN opens new opportunities 
for studying several environments that have been diﬃcult to address for
researchers. As part of the future work we intend to evaluate the performance of
the proposed protocol in a real-world scenario: throughput, latency, delay against
other protocols like MACA or MACAW. Depending on the obtained results we
will determine speciﬁc opportunities and restrictions to use this proposal.

Acknowledgments. This work was partially supported by the European Community 
through the project Community Networks Testbed for the Future Internet
(CONFINE): FP7-288535, and also by Spanish government under contract TIN2013-
47245-C2-1-R.

References

1. UNESCO: Facts and ﬁgures on marine biodiversity
2. Xu, G., Shen, W., Wang, X.: Applications of wireless sensor networks in marine

environment monitoring: a survey. Sensors 14(9), 16932–16954 (2014)

3. ITU: M.1371: Technical characteristics for an automatic identiﬁcation system using

time-division multiple access in the VHF maritime mobile band

4. Yun, C., Lim, Y.K.: ASO-TDMA: ad-hoc self-organizing tdma protocol for shipborne 
ad-hoc networks. EURASIP J. Wirel. Commun. Netw. 2012(1) (2012)

5. Karn, P.: MACA - a new channel access method for packet radio. In: Proceedings
of the 9th Computer Networking Conference ARRL/CRRL Amateur Radio, pp.
134–140, September 1990

406

R. Santos et al.

6. Rice, J., Creber, B., Fletcher, C., Baxley, P., Rogers, K., McDonald, K., Rees,
D., Wolf, M., Merriam, S., Mehio, R., Proakis, J., Scussel, K., Porta, D., Baker,
J., Hardiman, J., Green, D.: Evolution of seaweb underwater acoustic networking.
In: OCEANS 2000 MTS/IEEE Conference and Exhibition, vol. 3. (2000), vol. 3,
2007–2017

7. Bharghavan, V., Demers, A., Shenker, S., Zhang, L.: Macaw: a media access protocol 
for wireless LAN’s. SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev. 24(4), 212–225 (1994)
8. Fullmer, C.L., Garcia-Luna-Aceves, J.J.: Floor acquisition multiple access (FAMA)
for packet-radio networks. SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev. 25(4), 262–273
(1995)

9. Pompili, D., Melodia, T., Akyildiz, I.: A CDMA-based medium access control for
underwater acoustic sensor networks. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 8(4), 1899–
1909 (2009)

10. Ng, H.H., Soh, W.S., Motani, M.: MAca-u: a media access protocol for underwater 
acoustic networks. In: Global Telecommunications Conference, 2008, IEEE
GLOBECOM 2008, pp. 1–5. IEEE, November 2008

11. EvoLogic: S2C M modem series

