Using Human-Centric Wireless Sensor Networks  

to Support Personal Security 

Pablo Carreño1, Francisco Gutierrez1, Sergio F. Ochoa1, and Giancarlo Fortino2 

1 Computer Science Department, Universidad de Chile 
Av. Blanco Encalada 2120, 3rd floor, Santiago, Chile 

{pcarreno,frgutier,sochoa}@dcc.uchile.cl 

2 DIMES, Università della Calabria 

Via P. Bucci, cubo 41C, 87036 Rende (CS), Italy 

g.fortino@unical.it 

Abstract.  Violence  and  crime  in  large  urban  areas  are  a  worldwide  problem 
that  is  still  open.  After  several  attempts  to  reduce  its  occurrence  and  impact, 
there  seems  to  be  an  agreement  that  crime  preventive  actions,  which  can  be 
taken by citizens and security organizations, are the best way to address it. This 
paper  proposes  the  use  of  human-centric  wireless  sensor  networks  to  help 
address  this  problem,  and  the  proposed  solution  is  complementary  to  those 
already used by security organizations. The architecture and main components 
of these networks are described in detail. The article also describes a software 
system  that  implements  most  of  the  components  of  these  networks.  Such  a 
system helps people be aware of the risks that appear to exist in a certain place 
at a certain time. Based on that information, citizens can take appropriate and 
on-time  preventive  actions.  A  preliminary  evaluation  of  the  system  has  been 
conducted, and the obtained results are also presented and discussed. 

Keywords: Personal security, crime prevention, participatory sensing, humancentric 
wireless sensor networks, crowdsourcing, social computing. 

1 

Introduction 

Everyday  more  and  more  applications  link  their  functionality  to  social  networking 
services (SNS) in some way. SNS capabilities, like crowdsourcing, can contribute to 
address challenges that were not easy to tackle in the past; particularly those requiring 
people opinions or observations [16, 19]. One of these problems is crime (e.g. assault, 
robbery, rape, vandalism, physical aggressions, and also murders) that is still an open 
issue  in  most  countries  around  the  world.  Although  government  organizations  are 
continually working to improve the personal security of civilians, crime rate does not 
seem to change too much [1, 11].  

Today  there  seems  to  be  a  consensus  that  crime  prevention  is  the  best  way  to 
address  this  problem.  Unfortunately  most  solutions  used  to  try  reducing  crime,  like 
the  use  of  surveillance  cameras  or  increasing  the  presence  of  security  agents  in  the 
field, are not robust enough in terms of crime prevention for civilians [9, 24, 28]. For 

M. Pathan, G. Wei, and G. Fortino (Eds.): IDCS 2013, LNCS 8223, pp. 51–64, 2013. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 

52 

P. Carreño et al. 

instance,  these  types  of  solutions  do  not  have  a  good  scalability,  because  it  is  not 
feasible  to  flood  a  city  with  surveillance  cameras  or  police  personnel  that  can  be 
active  all  the  time  protecting  civilians.  The  cost  and  complexity  of  these  solutions 
make them not feasible, even for developed countries.  

Conscious of such situation,  during the last  years government organizations have 
involved  citizens  to  a  greater  extent  (e.g.  through  anonymous  reports  of  crimes  or 
suspicious  activities)  in  the  process  of  crime  prevention.  This  has  allowed  them  to 
increase the coverage area and the monitoring capability of security organizations [6]. 
However, citizen participation is still bureaucratic (e.g. it requires to do a phone call 
or  fill  a  denounce  form),  therefore  it  tends  to  be  slow  and  with  a  low  participation 
rate. 

This article proposes the use of a participatory sensing strategy [4, 5], supported by 
a human-centric wireless sensor network [23], to help tackle the stated problem. The 
solution  empowers  ordinary  citizens  to  collect  and  share  security  information  from 
their surrounding environments, using their mobile phones in an easy and anonymous 
way. Considering the information provided by multiple participants, it is possible to 
perform an online diagnosis that allows civilians being aware of their current risk and 
personal security level, while they move through urban areas. The article also reports 
the design, development and evaluation of a mobile application that implements most 
of the components of this proposal.  

Next section presents the related work. Section 3 briefly introduces the concept of 
human-centric  wireless  sensor  networks.  Section  4  discusses  the  main  requirements 
and  design  decisions  made  in  the  system  implementation.  Section  5  describes  the 
structure  and  main  components  of  the  solution.  Section  6  shows  and  discusses  the 
preliminary results. Section 7 presents the conclusions and the future work. 

2 

Related Work 

Personal  security  can  be  understood  as  the  level  of  protection  of  a  person  from 
intentional  criminal  acts  [29].  It  is  considered  a  core  element  of  the  well-being  of 
individuals.  The  OECD  Better  Life  Index  reports  that  4.0%  of  people  in  OECD 
countries say they have been assaulted or mugged over the past 12 months, and the 
average homicide rate in those countries is 2.2 murders per 100,000 inhabitants [27]. 

Criminologists  recognize  crime  prevention  strategies  aimed  at  reducing  the 
criminal  opportunities  that  arise  from  the  routines  of  everyday  life  (e.g.  improving 
surveillance of areas that might attract crime by using closed-circuit television). These 
strategies  are  conceptualized  under  the  notion  of  situational  crime  prevention  [30]. 
Situational prevention seeks to reduce opportunities for specific categories of crime, 
by increasing difficulties to perform those actions and decreasing the associated risks 
and rewards [7]. This crime prevention strategy requires that the potential victims be 
conscious of their current risk situation, which seems to be the most unexplored and 
complex part of the problem.   

Typically people do not have supporting information about the personal security in 
many areas of a city, even while living in that place. This lack of information can be 

 

Using Human-Centric Wireless Sensor Networks to Support Personal Security 

53 

managed  in  different  ways  by  people.  Individuals  can  use  their  own  experience  to 
quantify the security level of the area in which they are located, or they can use the 
experience  of  their  contacts  (e.g.  friends  in  a  SNS)  or  mainstream  media  (e.g. 
newspaper  articles).  For  example,  neighborhood  programs  and  patrols  can  provide 
friendly,  non-invasive  support  for  members  in  a  community,  aiming  to  help  these 
people feel better connected to the neighborhood and help them reduce their risk of 
becoming victims of frauds and scams as well as other crimes.  

Information is also usually managed by official sources from the government and 
other  public  agencies,  which  publish  studies  and  relevant  statistics  related  to 
homeland  security.  Even  if  these  latter  sources  provide  good  references  to  estimate 
the inherent risk of a particular area, users may be confronted to information provided 
in  a  complex  format  (e.g.  in  confusing  long  documents),  thus  being  perceived  as 
difficult to  understand. Particularly, this  is a problem  when individuals are  faced to 
quickly  and  accurately  find  out  the  inherent  risk  of  a  particular  area  at  a  particular 
time. 

Burke et al. [4] introduced the concept of participatory sensing. It refers to "task 
deployed mobile devices to form interactive, participatory sensor networks that enable 
public  and  professional  users  to  gather,  analyze  and  share  local  knowledge". 
Currently,  the  growth  in  mobile  devices  (e.g.  smartphones)  has  deployed  hardware 
capabilities  in  the  form  of  multiple  sensors  (e.g.  motion  sensor  or  accelerometer, 
gyroscope,  ambient  light  sensor).  These  sensors  have  made  participatory  sensing 
viable  in  the  large-scale.  Therefore,  individuals  and  groups  of  people  actively 
participate  in  the  collection  of  information  for  purposes  ranging  from  crime 
prevention to scientific studies [14]. 

Naturally,  one  of  the  critical  factors  to  drive  success  in  participatory  sensing  is 
related  to  the  data  collecting  from  users  in  order  to  generate  collective  intelligence. 
Lan et al. [18] proposed an incentive scheme for a vehicle-based mobile surveillance 
system  by  adopting  participatory  sensing,  under 
that  video 
surveillance is commonly used by the police and private security officers to determine 
and  investigate  crimes  and  other  incidents.  Ballesteros  et  al.  [2]  studied  a  set  of 
techniques  for  evaluating  the  people  security  based  on  their  spatial  and  temporal 
dimensions.  The  authors  show  that  information  collected  from  geo-social  networks 
can be used to prevent crimes. Therefore it seems to be clear that participatory sensing 
could be a good strategy to address the stated problem; however the way in which we 
implement the supporting solution can affect its usability and usefulness.  

the  assumption 

Estrin  [10]  proposed  a  layered  architecture  to  support  participatory  sensing.  The 
data  collection  performed  using  that  architecture  requires  a  permanent  link  between 
the  sensors  and  the  server  that  stores  and  manages  the  data.  The  dependence  of 
particular  components  (e.g.  server  or  communication  links)  represents  a  serious 
restriction  to  address  personal  security  evaluation,  because  the  system  should  be 
available when required. Duarte et al. [8] go a step forward in the decentralization of 
the system architecture for participatory sensing, and propose the use of mobile units 
acting  as  an  intermediary  between  servers  and  the  sensors,  which  eventually  can 
support  asynchronous  communication  among  the  network  components.  Ochoa  and 
Santos [23] go a step even further proposing a human-centric wireless sensor network 

54 

P. Carreño et al. 

(HWSN), which include all the components of its predecessors, but also witness units 
that  act  as  a  repository  of  information  for  users  located  in  a  particular  area.  These 
units considerably increase the system availability, in terms of information support to 
make  decisions,  in  any  area.  Therefore,  it  is  the  alternative  chosen  to  support 
participatory sensing in the described scenario. 

3 

Human-Centric Wireless Sensor Networks 

These  networks  are  heterogeneous  in  terms  of  the  communication  support  and  the 
type of nodes that can participate to them. The communication support can be any that 
allows interaction between two or more nodes. The nodes are also heterogeneous, and 
they  can  play  up  to  four  roles:  regular  sensors,  human-based  sensors,  mules  and 
witness units. Regular sensors (RS) measure a certain context variable and transmits 
their  value  to  other  units.  Examples  of  these  sensors  are  GPS,  temperature  sensors, 
wearable  sensors  (also  used  as  Body  Sensor  Networks  -  BSNs  [3,  12]),  and  also 
mobile devices able to detect the presence of other devices (i.e. sensors) in the area. 
The  human-based  sensors  (HBS)  are  people  that  use  their  senses  (possibly 
complemented  by  regular  sensors,  especially  belonging  to  BSNs)  to  capture 
information  about  a  certain  variable  of  interest  (e.g.  the  delinquency  in  a  particular 
area), elaborate on it, and then produce knowledge that represents the current value of 
that variable. HBS use a mobile device and a wireless network to share the generated 
knowledge with other network nodes. Although the information provided by HBS is 
not  accurate,  they  represent  our  best  option  when  the  observed  variable  is  not 
measurable with a regular sensor but by means of virtual/logical sensors [25]. 

Mules  (Mu)  are  mobile  units  that  connect  two  or  more  disconnected  networks. 
Examples  of  mules  are  vehicles  and  passersby  having  a  mobile  computing  device. 
These mules usually also act as witness units (WU), i.e. network nodes that store the 
information  shared  by  other  nodes  in  a  certain  area.  These  units  are  passive 
repositories  of  information  (e.g.  about  personal  security)  that  is  relevant  in  the  area 
where the WU is located. These units interact on-demand with the HBS and they can 
be implemented using almost any computing device with ad hoc communication and 
storage capability; i.e. from tiny computing devices to servers.  

Figure 1 shows the architecture of a HWSN, which is typically composed of four 
layers:  sensing,  communication,  information  persistence  and  application. The  lower 
layer is in charge of sensing the variables to be considered in the process that is being 
supported; in our case, the evaluation of the personal security of people in a certain 
area at a certain time. The information captured by the sensors is then shared using 
the  services  provided  by  communication  units  (e.g.  WiFi  or  cellular  antennas)  or 
mules. These components are part of the communication layer. 

In order to increase the information availability in the area where it is required, the 
shared  information  is  temporarily  or  permanently  stored  in  HBS  and  witness  units 
located  in  the  area,  and  eventually  in  remote  servers  or  on  Cloud  computing 
infrastructures [13]. These components are part of the information persistence layer.  

 

 

Using Human-Centric Wireless Sensor Networks to Support Personal Security 

55 

Fig. 1. Layered architecture of a human-centric wireless sensor network 

 

Finally, the mobile systems are in the application layer, which use the information 
managed by the lower layers to provide a direct service to the end-users; for instance 
to  inform  them  their  current  personal  security  level.  It  is  important  to  note  that  the 
same network node can play several roles at the same time. For instance, an HBS can 
act as a sensor when its user shares information through the network, as a Mu while 
the  user  move  through  a  certain  area,  and  as  a  WU  when  the  user  is  in  the 
neighborhood where he/she lives. The roles of a network node in a certain instant are 
given by the services it provides to other nodes and also to its user. 

4  Main Requirements and Design Decisions 

The  design  of  the  mobile  application  that  informs  the  people  about  their  current 
personal  security  level  should  consider  several  functional  (FR)  and  non-functional 
requirements (NFR). These requirements were obtained and validated through a focus 
group with twelve potential users of the system. By addressing these requirements the 
application  has  a  chance  of  being  usable  and  useful  in  a  real  scenario.  Next  we 
describe the main non-functional requirements that were defined, and also the design 
decisions made to address them. 
•  High availability. The system should be available independently of the possibility 
to access remote servers (i.e. WUs). For that reason, the geographical information 
of  an  area  and  also  its  vulnerability  information  should  be  managed  using  a 
loosely-coupled schema. This means that a mobile device running the system must 

56 

P. Carreño et al. 

locally  keep  all  the  information  of  the  area  where  it  is  located.  Periodically  the 
device  synchronizes  its  information  with  WUs  in  charge  of  the  information 
persistence,  and  eventually  downloads  information  of  new  areas  that  are  now 
relevant, if the user moved to other places. If the system does not have access to a 
WU, it evaluates the user vulnerability based on the local information. Eventually, 
if it does not have enough information to determine the user vulnerability, it can 
ask to neighbor devices for additional information or for a complete vulnerability 
diagnosis.  Interactions  with  other  network  nodes  require  counting  on  access  to 
infrastructure based on ad hoc communication units. Since the system availability 
also  depends  on  the  availability  of  the  device  where  it  runs,  the  target  device 
should  be  mobile  and  be  most  of  the  time  with  the  user.  Considering  these 
restrictions, a handheld device like a smartphone or a small slate seems to be the 
most appropriate option for deploying the system. 

•  Quick access. In case that the user wants to get personal security information ondemand,
  the  access  to  such  information  should  be  quick,  and  the  most  relevant 
information  must  be  shown  first.  In  that  sense,  the  use  of  visual  information  is 
usually the best alternative to deliver information to the user. The type of actions 
for crime prevention that can be taken by the user can depend on it. Moreover, it is 
important to use a mobile device with fast boot, like a smartphone or a slate. The 
use  of  a  loosely-coupled  data  link  strategy,  which  prioritizes  the  use  of  locally 
stored  map  tiles,  also  contributes  to  have  a  quick  access  to  the  supporting 
information. 

•  Proactiveness.  The  system  should  contribute  to  prevent  crime  by  autonomously 
informing the user about possible vulnerability situations that it identifies. For that 
reason  the  system  should  be  active  all  the  time,  monitoring  and  evaluating  the 
personal  security  context  of  the  user.  Usually  this  functionality  is  implemented 
through  an  autonomous  agent.  An  alarm  should  be  triggered  every  time  that  a 
vulnerability  situation  exceeds  a  certain  threshold.  Depending  on  its  criticality, 
more  than  one  alarm  can  be  triggered  using  awareness  mechanisms,  e.g.  visual 
messages, ringtones or tactons. 

• 

Information trustworthiness. When a service quality depends on the quality of the 
information  that  it  provides,  the  information  trustworthiness  becomes  a  critical 
requirement. Although there are several strategies to address this requirement, the 
recent  research  in  participatory  sensing  indicates  that  crowdsourcing  and 
reputation is usually a good combination to deal with this issue [17, 20]. Data held 
by other network nodes and WUs can also contribute to increase the trustfulness 
of the information.  

•  Understandable  information.  The  system  must  notify  to  its  users,  as  soon  as 
possible,  when  they  are  in  risk.  Therefore,  the  information  that  the  system 
provides  them  should  be  easy  to  understand  by  average  users.  In  that  sense,  the 
use  of  visual  information  and  voice  messages  seem  to  be  appropriate  to  address 
this  requirement  in  most  work  contexts.  In  case  of  messages  indicating  physical 
locations, the use of geo-referenced visual information (e.g. a map) is usually the 
easiest way to provide an effective communication to end-users. Provided that an 

 

Using Human-Centric Wireless Sensor Networks to Support Personal Security 

57 

• 

effective  communication  requires  that  input  and  output  channels  be  aligned, 
awareness mechanisms are usually required to do that. 

Interoperability. The system should be able to exchange data and requests services 
to other devices, as a way to provide more accurate and on-time advices/alarms to 
end-users.  This  interoperability  requirement  has  a  well-known  solution,  which 
consists on using data and service representations that adhere to standard formats 
(e.g. XML for data, and Web services to implement functionality). The interaction 
between  nodes  will  require  counting  on 
infrastructure-based  or  ad  hoc 
communication units. 

Moreover,  there  is  a  list  of  FRs  that  can  also  be  addressed  by  the  system.  The 
services that address those requirements must also deal with the previously presented 
NFR.  
•  Map  navigation.  The  system  must  provide  geo-referenced  visual  information, 
because  warnings  are  typically  related  to  a  particular  place  or  area  of  the  city. 
Therefore the user should be able to navigate the  map of the area, using several 
zoom levels. The use of geo-referenced tiles and GPS positively impact usability 
and performance of these systems [21]. 

•  Device  positioning.  In  order  to  determine  the  personal  security  of  people,  the 
system needs to know its users location. Since a risk evaluation requires a coarsegrain 
position of the user, in most cases the use of GPS is a good option to make a 
diagnosis  of  the  area.  In  the  case  of  indoor  locations,  the  use  of  the  last  known 
outdoor  position  of  the  user  could  be  enough  to  determine  his/her  vulnerability 
level. Although using only GPS can lead the system to make some error when the 
user  is  indoor,  this  strategy  considerably  reduces  the  complexity  to  implement 
services  that  perform  device  positioning.  Devices  not  having  positioning 
capabilities  can  request  such  information  to  neighbor  nodes  using  ad  hoc 
communication services. 

•  Communication. The information provided by the crowd should be shared as soon 
as  possible  to  benefit  the  participants  and  reduce  the  feasibility  that  malicious 
interventions affect the trustworthiness of the shared data. In both cases, counting 
on  communication  among  participants  is  mandatory.  Such  a  communication  can 
be  done  using  ad  hoc  or  infrastructure-based  communication  systems,  or  a 
combination of them. Typically the  former  helps addressing information sharing 
in a small area, and it is usually enough to support the diagnosis of pedestrians’ 
personal security. The latter covers larger areas and provides a  wider bandwidth 
that allows supporting properly the crowd activities. This communication modality 
helps  diagnosing  the  personal  security  of  an  ample  range  of  users,  from 
pedestrians to car drivers. 

•  Device tracking. This requirement allows remote users to monitor the movements 
of  a  user  on  a  map.  Typically  it  is  required  when  the  user  is  asking  for  help  to 
someone else, e.g. friends or family. The tracking capability can be implemented 
using  device  positioning  and  communication;  and  the  grants  for  monitoring  the 
user  movements  can  be  implemented  using  the  user’s  personal  contacts  from  a 
SNS (like Facebook). 

58 

P. Carreño et al. 

•  Easy feeding. If we want that many people report vulnerability (in terms of crime) 
of city areas, the reporting process should be easy and fast. This process can be 
done using handheld devices that are easy to transport, deploy and use, and most 
of  them  have  GPS  that  allows  users  to  geo-reference  their  vulnerability  reports. 
The information of these reports should be locally stored into the device, and then 
appropriately transferred to a WU to avoid delays in the feeding process. People 
reporting  information  about  vulnerability  are  HBS  that  use  their  senses, 
knowledge  and  experience  to  determine  that  a  place  or  area,  under  certain 
conditions, is vulnerable to specific types of crimes. The use of visual information 
during the feeding process usually contributes to reduce the users error rate. 

•  Data  sharing.  Data  sharing  benefits  the  system  users  and  reduces  the  impact  of 
malicious interventions. The ad hoc and infrastructure-based communication units 
play a key role in this process. Moreover, the presence of MUs and WUs typically 
can contribute to enhance the data sharing among network nodes, which positively 
impacts on the availability, performance and trustworthiness of the whole system.  
•  Warnings/alarms delivery. The main goal of the system is to deliver notifications 
to users, in order to make them aware of their current vulnerability situation. The 
evaluation of users vulnerability requires geo-localization (GPS) to determine the 
users'  position,  and  awareness  mechanisms  to  inform  them  about  their  possible 
risks. In case that a user asks for external help (e.g. friends or family), the system 
would  require  connecting  to  a  social  networking  service  to  retrieve  the  user’s 
personal contact information, and deliver the alarms accordingly. 

Figure  2  summarizes  the  relationship  among  the  main  FR,  NFR  and  design 
decisions  involved  in  the  system.  The  relationship  also  indicates  whether  a  design 
element is mandatory, optional or not required to implement a certain requirement.  

 

Fig. 2. Correspondence matrix: requirements vs. design decisions 

 

 

5 

Using Human-Centric Wireless Sensor Networks to Support Personal Security 

59 

System Implementation 

The current implementation of the system determines the risks of a user to car theft 
and  vandalism,  regular  delinquency  (robbery  and  assaults),  drugs  traffic  and 
disturbance (physical violence). Figure 3 describes the technologies and components 
used  in  the  system  implementation.  The  system  architecture  adheres  to  the 
architecture of a HWSN (see Figure 2).  

 

 

n
o

i
t

a
c

i
l

p
p
A

 

n
o

i
t

e
c
n
e

i

t
s
s
r
e
P

a
m
r
o

f

n

I

n
o

i
t

i

a
c
n
u
m
m
o
C

i

g
n
s
n
e
S

h

HBS-3 HLMP 
node (Neighbors)

HBS-4 HLMP 
node (Passerby)

WU-1 

Remote Server

WU-2 Facebook 

Server

CU-1 3G 

Cellular Antenna

CU-2 HLMP (Ad 

hoc Network)

Mu-1 HLMP 

node (Passerby)

Mu-2 HLMP 
node (Vehicle)

HBS-1 Inhabitant of the area

RS-1
GPS

RS-2

Nodes Detector

 

Fig. 3. Architecture of the implemented system 

The  sensing  layer  considers  HBS  (e.g.  passersby  or  neighbors)  that  use 
smartphones  and  simple  GUI  forms  to  add  information  to  the  system  in  a  looselycoupled 
 way.  Fig.4.a  shows  two  samples  of  these  forms,  through  which  the  HBS 
indicates  what  event  they  saw  or  suffered,  when  it  happened  and  how  many  times 
they have seen similar situations in that place. The users indicate on a digital map the 
exact location of the events, and the GPS geo-references that information.  

The system considers a 3G connection with a server (WU) and WiFi-based mobile 
ad hoc network that is implemented using an High Level MANET Protocol (HLMP) 
infrastructure [26]. Such an infrastructure also allows a network node (e.g. a HBS or 
WU) to detect other nodes in the area and exchange information among them.  

The  information  persistence  layer  considers  the  participation  of  WU  and  HBS. 
Two  particular  WUs  play  a  key  role  in  the  system:  the  system  server  and  the 

60 

P. Carreño et al. 

Facebook server. The first o
of every area, considering th
the incidents. The Facebook
users’ contact list, in case t
HLMP network nodes) par
security  information of the
with other nodes through th

one stores and makes the fusion of the security informat
he reports features and the reputation of the users report
k server is used to authenticate the users and to retrieve 
that an “ask for help” message is delivered. The HBS (
rticipating in  this layer act as temporal repositories of 
e area  where they are located. They exchange informat
he HLMP infrastructure. 

tion 
ting 
the 
(i.e. 
the 
tion 

 

  
(a) 

(b) 

 

(c) 

Fig. 4. 

User interfaces of the implemented system 

In  the  application  layer,
Fig. 4.b. shows the user cur
meters around him/her. Fig
user when a risk overcame
level  of  a  user  follow  the 
means  “dangerous  situation
filtering the incident record
user. Several awareness me
to notify the user about his/

,  we  can  see  the  information  about  the  user  vulnerabil
rrent location and the records of incidents in an area of 2
g. 4.c. shows the information that the system deliver to 
e a certain threshold. The colors used to represent the r
same  semantics  as  a  semaphore:  green  means  “ok”, 
n”,  and  yellow  means  “caution”.  The  system  also  allo
ds and shows only those added by Facebook contacts of 
echanisms (from ringtones to tactoons) were implemen
/her current risk level.  

lity. 
200 
the 
risk 
red 
ows 
f the 
nted 

6 

Results 

Section 4 highlighted the i
design of the system. Ther
in order to assess at what e
we  worked  with  individual
smartphones and  SNS.  As 
city of Santiago, Chile, in 
group  of  evaluators.  The 
learnability and satisfaction
and observation and thinkin
The sample was formed 
[15, 22]. On one hand, the q

mportance of the usefulness and usability concerns in 
refore, we conducted a usability evaluation with end-us
xtent these concerns were considered. As target end-us
ls  aged  between  18  and  35  years  old  that  extensively 
an additional constraint,  we limited the evaluation to 
order to have a common  geographical context  within 
usability  attributes  considered  in  the  evaluation  we
n, and the assessment techniques used were: questionna
ng aloud. 
by following typical recommendations in usability test
questionnaire consisted of items graded in a 5-point Lik

the 
sers 
sers, 
use 
the 
the 
ere: 
aire, 

ting 
kert 

 

Using Human-Centric 

Wireless Sensor Networks to Support Personal Security 

61 

scale  that  intended  to  ass
evaluators  once  they  have 
observation  and  thinking  a
them a set of tasks to be pe
relevant  observations  reg
completed,  completed  with
spontaneous  reactions  indi
median score assigned to ea

sess  satisfaction  and  learnability.  It  was  applied  to 
used  the  application.  On  the  other  hand,  we  applied 
aloud  technique  to  a  group  of  5  evaluators.  We  assig
erformed by interacting with the application and we no
garding  their  performance  (i.e.  task  easily  comple
h  difficulty,  or  not  completed)  and  user  experience  (
icating  frustration  and/or  ease  of  use).  Fig.  5  shows 
ach item in the questionnaire. 

20 
the 
gned 
oted 
ted, 
(i.e. 
the 

 

Fig. 5. Usability evaluation results 

 

According to the evalua
navigation.  However,  the 
improved, as the evaluators
as the logic behind the orga
to this latter result may be 
applications specifically de
the  esthetics  and  graphic
particular point, as the font
the information that is prese
content of the application, 
for what the service is provi
Next  we  present  the  res
aloud technique. Fig. 6 sho
the proposed tasks: (1) vot
results, and (3) reading com
According  to  the  result
achieve. Regarding the spo
difficulty for integrating Fa
two users showed frustratio
This was partly due to a pr
sometimes a spot that was n

ators,  the current design of the application allows an  e
information  architecture  (at  the  user  interface)  can 
s consider that some elements are difficult to find, as w
anization of some visual elements. A plausible explanat
linked to the lack of familiarity of evaluators with so
signed to provide awareness in security matters. Regard
al  design  of  the  application,  the  evaluators  liked 
s and used colors are sober and try to enhance the value
ented in the interface. Moreover, the evaluators praised 
as they consider it to be relevant and useful in the cont
ided. 
sults  of  the  evaluation  using  the  observation  and  think
ows the median perceived ease or difficulty for achiev
ting for a particular place, (2) understanding the presen
mments. 
ts,  the  three  proposed  tasks  were  perceived  as  easy
ontaneous comments stated by the evaluators, there was
acebook as a SNS working with the application. Howev
on when deciding how to cast a vote for a particular sp
roblem when launching the application, since it displa
not known or recognized beforehand by the evaluators.  

y  to 
s no 
ver, 
pot. 
ayed 

easy 
be 
well 
tion 
cial 
ding 
this 
e of 
the 
text 

king 
ving 
nted 

62 

P. Carreño et al. 

Fig. 6. Per

rceived ease or difficulty for task achievement 

 

This  was  improved  in 

the  next  iteration  in  the  development  life  cycle  of 

the 

application. 

The  system  performanc
indirectly evaluated through
which probably means that 

was 
ce  was  not  formally  evaluated  in  this  stage,  but  it  w
sue, 
h the system usability. No evaluator mentioned this iss
  
the system performance was considered as appropriate.

7 

Conclusions and

d Future Work 

The current mechanisms to
helping  potential  victims  e
therefore  their  capability 
diminished.  Trying  to  he
participatory  sensing  syst
government  organizations. 
network. It  uses crowdsour
information  from  the  field
about  their  current  persona
can also be used to build a
allows  security  organizat
prevention/fight actions. 

o provide personal security are not particularly focused
easily  determine  their  inherent  risk  to  crimes  in  real-tim
to  take  appropriate  and  on-time  preventive  actions
elp  addressing  that  problem,  this  article  proposes
tem  that  complements  the  already  used  solutions 
The  system  is  based  on  a  human-centric  wireless  sen
rcing,  human-based sensors and regular sensors to col
,  and  several  awareness  mechanisms  to  inform  the  us
al  security  risks.  The  information  provided  by  the  syst
a spatiotemporal view of crime (e.g. by incident type) t
tions 

d on 
me; 
s  is 
s  a 
by 
nsor 
llect 
sers 
tem 
that 
the 

improve 

to  understand 

its  evolution  and 

The  usability  of  the  sy
obtained results allowed us 
interface,  even  though  the
pertinence  of  the  warnings
this stage. However they w
by the evaluators. Our prel
are at least between the regu
The next step in this initia
not considered in this first st
the field using different qua
this initiative wants to explor
witness units and HBS, soci
crime. Such a strategy will be

stem  was  evaluated  using  two  different  techniques.  T
to identify the need to adjust some components of the u
ey  were  minor  issues.  The  system  performance  and 
s  given  by  the  application  were  not  formally  evaluated
were indirectly assessed through the activity test perform
iminary feelings indicate that these aspects of the solut
ular values that a user can expect for these systems.  
ative is to evaluate the quality aspects of the solution that w
tage. Moreover, we want to evaluate the information flow
antities and distribution of WUs. That is a research issue 
re, because it could indicate that, by increasing the numbe
iety could become more resilient to physical delinquency 
e particularly focused on crime prevention. 

The 
user 
the 
d  at 
med 
tion 

were 
w in 
that 
er of 
and 

 

Using Human-Centric Wireless Sensor Networks to Support Personal Security 

63 

Acknowledgments. This work has been partially supported by the Fondecyt Project 
(Chile), grant: 1120207. The work of Francisco Gutierrez has been supported by the 
Conicyt (Chile) Ph.D. scholarship. 

References 

1.  Aebi, M.F., Linde, M.F.: Conviction Statistics as an Indicator of Crime Trends in Europe 
from  1990  to  2006.  European  Journal  on  Criminal  Policy  and  Research 18,  103–144 
(2012) 

2.  Ballesteros, J., Rahman, M., Carbunar, B., Rishe, N.: Safe Cities. A Participatory Sensing 
Approach. In: Proceedings of the 37th IEEE Local Computer Networks Conference (LCN 
2012), Clearwater Beach, United States (2012) 

3.  Bellifemine,  F.,  Fortino,  G.,  Giannantonio,  R.,  Gravina,  R.,  Guerrieri,  A.,  Sgroi,  M.: 
SPINE:  A  domain-specific  framework  for  rapid  prototyping  of  WBSN  applications. 
Software Practice and Experience 41(3), 237–265 (2011) 

4.  Burke,  J.,  Estrin,  D.,  Hansen,  M.,  Parker,  A.,  Ramanathan,  N.,  Reddy,  S.,  Srivastava, 
M.B.:  Participatory  Sensing.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  World  Sensor  Web  Workshop,  in 
Conjunction with ACM SenSys 2006 (2006) 

5.  Campbell,  A.,  Eisenman,  S.,  Lane,  N.,  Miluzzo,  E.,  Peterson,  R.:  People-centric  Urban 
Sensing. In: Proceedings of 2nd Annual Int. Wireless Internet Conference, WICON 2006 
(2006) 

6.  Cattelino, J.R.: The Difference that Citizenship Makes: Civilian Crime Prevention on the 

Lower East Side. Political and Legal Anthropology Review 27(1), 114–137 (2008) 

7.  Clarke, R.: Situational Crime Prevention. In: Tonry, M., Farrington, D. (eds.) Building a 
Safer  Society:  Strategic  Approaches  to  Crime  Prevention,  University  of  Chicago  Press, 
Chicago (1995) 

8.  Duarte,  S.,  Navalho,  D.,  Ferreira,  H.,  Preguica,  N.:  Scalable  Data  Processing  for 
Community  Sensing  Applications.  Mobile  Networks  and  Application 18(3),  357–372 
(2013) 

9.  Dubbeld,  L.:  Observing  Bodies:  Camera  Surveillance  and  the  Significance  of  the  Body. 

Ethics and Information Technology 5(3), 151–162 (2003) 

10.  Estrin, D.: Participatory sensing: applications and architecture (Internet Predictions). IEEE 

Internet Computing 14(1), 12–42 (2010) 

11.  Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation.  Crime  in  The  United  States  2010  -  FBI  Statistics, 

http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/ 
crime-in-the-u.s/2010/crime-in-the-u.s.-2010/ 
tables/10tbl01.xls (last access: July 12, 2013) 

12.  Fortino,  G.,  Giannantonio,  R.,  Gravina,  R.,  Kuryloski,  P.,  Jafari,  R.:  Enabling  Effective 
Programming and Flexible Management of Efficient Body Sensor Network Applications. 
IEEE Transactions on Human-Machine Systems 43(1), 115–133 (2013) 

13.  Fortino,  G.,  Parisi,  D.,  Pirrone,  V.,  Di  Fatta,  G.:  BodyCloud:  A  SaaS  Approach  for 
Community  Body  Sensor  Networks.  To  appear  in  Future  Generation  Computer  Systems 
(2014) 

14.  Hall,  D.,  Chong,  C.-Y.,  Llinas,  J.,  Liggins,  M.:  Distributed  Data  Fusion  for  NetworkCentric 
Operations. CRC Press, Boca Raton (2012) 

15.  Holzinger, A.: Usability engineering methods for software developers. Communications of 

the ACM 48(1), 71–74 (2005) 

64 

P. Carreño et al. 

16.  Howe, J.: Crowdsourcing: Why the power of the crowd is driving the future of business. 

Crown Business, New York (2008) 

17.  Huang, K., Kanhere, S.S., Hu, W.: Are You Contributing Trustworthy Data? The Case for 
A  Reputation  Framework  in  Participatory  Sensing.  In:  Proceedings  of  ACM  MSWiM, 
Bodrum, Turkey (2010) 

18.  Lan, K.-C., Chou, C.-M., Wang, H.-Y.: An Incentive-Based Framework for Vehicle-Based 

Mobile Sensing. Procedia Computer Science, 1–6 (2012) 

19.  Lim,  S.L.,  Quercia,  D.,  Finkelstein,  A.:  StakeSource:  Harnessing  the  power  of 
crowdsourcing  and  social  networks  in  stakeholder  analysis.  In:  Proceedingsof  the  32nd 
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE 2010), Cape Town, 
South Africa (2010) 

20.  Mashhadi,  A.J.,  Capra,  L.:  Quality  control  for  real-time  ubiquitous  crowdsourcing.  

In: Proc. of UbiCrowd 2011, Beijing, China (2011) 

21.  Monares,  A.,  Ochoa,  S.F.,  Pino,  J.A.,  Herskovic,  V.,  Rodriguez-Covili,  J.,  Neyem,  A.: 
Mobile Computing in Urban Emergency Situations: Improving the Support to Firefighters 
in the Field. Expert Systems with Applications 38(2), 1255–1267 (2011) 

22.  Nielsen, J.: Usability Engineering. AP Professional, Cambridge (1993) 
23.  Ochoa, S.F., Santos, R.: Human-centric Wireless Sensor Networks to Improve Information 
Availability During Urban Search and Rescue Activities. Information Fusion (in press, to 
appear, 2014) 

24.  Posner,  R.A.:  Privacy,  Surveillance,  and  Law.  The  University  of  Chicago  Law  Review 

75(1), 245–260 (2008) 

25.  Raveendranathan, N., Galzarano, S., Loseu, V., Gravina, R., Giannantonio, R., Sgroi, M., 
Jafari,  R.,  Fortino,  G.:  From  Modeling  to  Implementation  of  Virtual  Sensors  in  Body 
Sensor Networks. IEEE Sensors Journal 12(3), 583–593 (2012) 

26.  Rodríguez-Covili, J.F., Ochoa, S.F., Pino, J.A., Messeguer, R.,  Medina, E., Royo, D.:  A 
Communication  Infrastructure  to  Ease  the  Development  of  Mobile  Collaborative 
Applications. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 34(6), 1883–1893 (2011) 

27.  Safety - OECD Better Life Index,  

http://www.oecdbetterlifeindex.org/topics/safety/  
(last visit: July 11, 2013) 

28.  Travis, A.: CCTV Schemes in City and Town Centres Have Little Effect on Crime, says 

Report, http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2009/may/18/ 
cctv-crime-police (last visit: July 20, 2013) 

29.  United  Nations  Development  Programme.  New  Dimensions  of  Human  Security.  Human 

Development Report (1994),  
http://hdr.undp.org/en/reports/global/hdr1994/  
(last visit: July 12, 2013) 

30.  Von Hirsch, A., Garland, D., Wakefield, A.: Ethical and Social Perspectives on Situational 

Crime Prevention. Hart Publishing, Oxford (2004) 

