 

Extending Social Networking Services  
toward a Physical Interaction Scenario 

Camilo Vergara, Sergio F. Ochoa, Francisco Gutierrez, and Juan Rodriguez-Covili 

Computer Science Department, Universidad de Chile 
Av. Blanco Encalada 2120, 3rd Floor, Santiago, Chile 

{cavergar,sochoa,frgutier,jrodrigu}@dcc.uchile.cl 

Abstract.  Mobile  computing  provides  ubiquitous  access  to  social  networking 
services  allowing  computer-mediated  interaction  among  its  members.  This 
article proposes a new and complementary interaction paradigm promoting face-
to-face encounters among community members, based on their physical proximity.
 Therefore, the virtual space for interactions is extended towards the physical 
one.  The  proposal  was  implemented  through  a  mobile  ubiquitous  application, 
which  was  evaluated  to understand  its  usability,  perceived  usefulness  and performance.
 The preliminary results of such evaluations are highly encouraging. 

Keywords: Social networking services, ubiquitous computing, hybrid interaction 
paradigm, physical scenario, mobile ad hoc networks. 

1 

Introduction 

Social  Networking  Services  (SNS)  allow  users  to  connect  and  interact  with  others 
who have different beliefs or interests [8]. These systems  make deeper the relationship 
with already known people, reinforcing and strengthening the existing social ties 
[13]. Mobile devices provide ubiquitous access to SNS allowing a virtual interaction 
among  users.  However,  most  communities  are  partially  virtual,  so  they  require 
support for interacting not only in the virtual space, but also in the physical one [5]. 

This paper proposes an interaction paradigm to support this hybrid social scenario, 
making current SNS more ubiquitous. System availability and privacy are important 
issues to consider in these systems design [1]. In order to evaluate this hybrid interaction 
 paradigm,  a  mobile  ubiquitous  application  was  implemented.  The  tool,  named 
Lukap, was evaluated and the preliminary results indicate the system would be appropriate 
to support partially virtual communities (PVC). 

The  extension  of  the  current  SNS  interaction  paradigm  takes  advantage  of  the 
physical location of members. Based on that information and the privacy preferences, 
the application promotes face-to-face encounters. This functionality is highly available 
since Lukap requires just the communication support of a Mobile Ad hoc Network 
(MANET) [3] and the social data each user keeps locally in his/her device.  

Next  section reviews the related  work on supporting systems for partially  virtual 
communities. Section 3 introduces the hybrid social interaction space. Section 4 describes 
Lukap and its main components. Section 5 presents the evaluation settings and 
obtained results. Finally, section 6 presents the conclusions and future work. 

J. Bravo, D. López-de-Ipiña, and F. Moya (Eds.): UCAmI 2012, LNCS 7656, pp. 208–215, 2012. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012 

 

2 

Extending Social Networking Services toward a Physical Interaction Scenario 

209 

Social Networking Services and Partially Virtual Communities  

Social networks involve users who share similar interests and practices, and who interact 
regularly over a common communication channel [14, 15]. In this paper we are 
particularly interested in supporting interactions among members of a PVC. Gutierrez 
et al. define a PVC as a group of people who interact around a shared interest or goal 
using technology-mediated and face-to-face mechanisms [5]. Depending on the community 
 context,  different  PVCs  involve  different  degrees  of  virtualness.  Typically, 
SNS lack of support for physical interactions.   

Location-aware  community  systems  should  support  ad-hoc  interactions  with 
friends, family, colleagues and strangers. Also, they should show if a public resource 
is currently used, facilitate task coordination and help people avoid others [6]. 

Facebook  and  Twitter  currently  offer  a  way  to  label  each  contribution  with  tags 

linked to their location, either chosen by the author or generated through the device.  
Foursquare is a location-based SNS that can be used to support physical encounters 
between users. They can register different places, share tips with friends and others,
 and connect accounts with other SNS. The users’ location reference is based on 
the information that they declare, which has two main problems: (1) if a user wants to 
be  contacted,  s/he  must  be  aware  to  record  such  information,  and  (2)  the  location 
information  that  supports  the  interactions  among  members  could  be  accidentally  or 
intentionally  wrong  or  outdated.  On  October  2011,  Foursquare  v4.0  was  launched 
with  a  Radar  feature.  It  consists  on  an  automatic  notification  service  where  a  user 
may be aware of spots or people that are close to his/her current location. However, 
no  attention  was  given  to  enhance  this  feature  in  Foursquare  v5.0.  Moreover,  it  is 
only supported on iPhone 4 and 4S devices running iOS 5. Lindqvist et al. examined 
how  and  why  people  use  Foursquare.  They  found  people  tend  to  explore  places, 
coordinate with friends, signal availability to friends, among others [9]. 

Moran et al. developed a ubiquitous application named meetU, which supports social 
 networking  through  an  ad  hoc  communication  infrastructure  [11].  This  SNS  is 
available through the users’ mobile devices and it provides not only user interaction 
services, but also social and emotional awareness to mobile workers. 

The  Mobilis  project  provides  a  reusable  toolkit  to  develop  mobile  location-based 
social software with functionality like group communication, importing contacts from 
existing SNS, location sharing, proximity detection, among others [17]. The authors 
also proposed to support temporal and spatial restrictions for group visibility and the 
ability to users to join those groups, as they would provide an incentive for users to be 
at a physical place to login and interact with other nearby users [10]. 

3 

The Hybrid Interaction Space 

Figure  1  shows  the  hybrid  interaction  space  composed  of  a  virtual  and  a  physical 
space. Interaction among users in the virtual space is supported by Internet and typical 
SNS. Interactions in the physical world (i.e. face-to-face meetings) are supported by 
Lukap. The application uses a MANET [3] as a communication channel and also supports 
 information  from  the  SNS,  which  is  stored  into  the  devices  of  the  members 
through  an  on-demand  process.  Each  member  downloads  and  keeps  locally  his/her 

 

210 

C. Vergara et al. 

own  information  from  the  SNS  s/he  belongs  to,  including  the  privacy  preferences. 
Therefore,  the  services  for  supporting  physical  interactions  do  not  require  access  to 
Internet or a SNS server in real-time. In other words, the local information about SNS 
and the communication capabilities of the users’ mobile devices are enough to allow 
Lukap to promote interactions in the physical scenario. 

Fig. 1. Hybrid interaction space to support PVC activities 

 

A  full-duplex  data  synchronization  process  is  used  to  keep  the  coherence  of  the 
shared information between Lukap and the SNS. This process is also performed ondemand 
by users of mobile devices. Such a process exchanges information  with the 
SNS server through a provided API to interact with third-party applications [7].  

Lukap users can set their visibility preferences. If s/he is visible and other  member 
is physically close, then an alarm message will be triggered on the devices screens of 
both users. Once it is received, the users will decide if they want to interact face-toface 
by making a phone call to coordinate a meeting point, or using a GPS service or 
an Indoor Positioning System (IPS) to physically locate the target person. Depending 
on the physical scenario and on the number of people using Lukap, the detection service 
may identify the presence of members located up to 150 meters from other user. 

4 

The Lukap Application 

Lukap can automatically detect other members within the contacts of a particular user. 
This requires no supplementary action, so this service can be considered as an extension 
(or complement) to the user senses. Users can import their contacts from other 
SNS,  allowing  people  to  interact  through  any  of  the  communication  channels 
provided  by  Lukap.  A  user  can  set  his/her  status  as  available,  unavailable,  busy  or 
disconnected. Figure 2a shows the main user interface of Lukap. In this case, the user 
set his status as available to his family, but busy to his friends. Figure 2b shows how a 
user can import his/her contacts from a SNS. 

Lukap  was  developed  in  C#  using  the  Microsoft  .NET  4  framework  and  it  is 
currently available on Windows 7. The application uses HLMP API [16] as the main 
infrastructure to create and manage the MANET. Also, it guarantees that communication 
 among  users  is  secure,  and  that  personal  information  from  a  user  will  not  be 
accessible to other members through the network.  

 

 

Extending Social Netw

working Services toward a Physical Interaction Scenario 

211 

Device detection is provided by HLMP, a
community  member  detection  by  Luka
HLMP  also  provides  a  reference  distan
(number  of  hops)  between  a  user  a
his/her contacts.  

and 
ap. 
nce 
and 

Fig. 2a. Lukap Main User

r Interface 

Fig. 2b. Importing Contacts from other SNS
S 

 

Notifications are trigger
to end-users because their g
ical environment. Figure 3 
raction between the virtual
by  the  SNS  that  interact  w
different,  there  is  a  commu
specifically designed to int
intermediary between the S
ages the input/output of the
the SNS, other  mobile  nod
on-demand with Lukap. 

red each time a gap is detected. Most of them are invisi
goal is to keep updated the presence information in a ph
presents the Lukap architecture, which considers the in
l and the physical spaces. The virtual space is represen
with  Lukap  using  their  public  APIs  [7].  Since  each  AP
unication  layer  composed  of  several  controllers,  each 
teract with a particular SNS. An event manager acts as
SNS controllers and the Lukap services. Typically, it m
e invoked services, providing thus a unique interface w
des, and any external application that  wants to collabor

ible 
hys-
ntented 

PI  is 
one 
s an 
manwith 

rate 

The application main se
supporting  services,  user  in
plemented through the HLM
the MANET and providing
scenario [12]. The user inte
and awareness mechanisms
perform functions that are u
nality. This involves six se
an  activity  estimator,  a  res
Some of these components 
The context discovery  s
changes to other Lukap ser
The context-aware self-ada
environment changes consid

ervices are grouped in four categories: social informati
nterface,  and  communication  system.  This  last  one  is 
MP API, which is responsible of creating and maintain
g message exchange among nodes available in the phys
erface must expose through the user interface the servi
s required to perform each activity. The supporting servi
used by other services to expose complex and rich func
ervices: a context discovery, a context-aware self-adap
sources  handler,  a  users  detector  and  positioning  syst
come from the HLMP API coordination services. 
service is responsible of identifying and notifying cont
rvices, and also recording and retrieving context variab
aptor is in charge of self-adapting the application when 
derably.  

ion, 
imning 

ical 
ices 
ices 
ctioptor,
 
tem. 

text 
bles. 
the 

 

212 

C. Vergara et al. 

Fig. 3. Hybrid interaction space 

5 

Preliminary Results 

The activity estimator infers the type of 
activity  being  performed  by  a  user.  Based 
on such information, it deploys on the user 
interface the services that could be required 
by him/her.  

The  resources  handler  is  responsible  of 
managing the private and shared resources of 
each  node.  The  users  detector 
informs 
whether a particular mobile user is available 
or not  for interactions, and  also informs the 
connection  status  of  all  MANET  members. 
The  users  positioning  system  is  an  IPS  that 
helps find a mobile user in a physical scenario.
  The  social  information  component  involves 
four services: user profile, social linkages,
  social  content  and  content  linkages. 
The user profile service allows creating and 
maintaining the user profile, including privacy 
 issues. The social linkages service  maintains 
 the  social  links  among  users  and  also 
provides  such  information  to  other  Lukap 
services.  The  social  content  and  content 
linkages manage interrelated information that 
a user wants to share with others. 

The  Lukap  usefulness  and  usability  was  evaluated  through  a  focus  group  with  six 
software  designers.  Also,  its  performance  was  evaluated  in  a  real  scenario.  Next 
sections present the evaluation processes and the obtained results. 

5.1  Usefulness and Usability 

The software designers participating in the focus group were between 23 and 25 years 
old. All of them had at least two years of experience as software designers. Three had 
previous  experience  evaluating  usability  of  software  interfaces.  Two  hypothetical 
situations were presented (Table 1). Each one was divided in two stages: (1) presentation 
 and  (2)  discussion  where  participants  could  propose  solutions  to  the  situations. 
This gave us an idea of which services are mandatory and optional for users. 

The main issue identified is the lack of ways to perceive the availability of contacts. 
Among  the  given  solutions,  three  participants  proposed  to  display  the  current  user’s 
position  and  availability  using  a  SNS.  One  participant  pointed  out  that  a  ubiquitous 
application  would  be  useful  because  a  user  does  not  need  to  perform  any  action  to 
indicate his/her location and availability for social contact. Other alternatives based on 
remote  access  to  online  SNS  were  proposed.  However,  these  represent  a  significant 
limitation since a user must remain connected in order to be visible for others. 

 

 

Extending Social Networking Services toward a Physical Interaction Scenario 

213 

Table 1. Hypothetical situations used to evaluate the usability and usefulness of Lukap 

Situation  1:  It  is  Friday  evening  and  Alice  is 
sharing a drink with Bob at a bohemian quarter. 
Alice  has  to  leave  early  and  Bob  evaluates  the 
possibility of staying for a while if he manages to 
find  a  friend  nearby.  Since  the  area  is  small,  he 
walks around and tries to find some friends. 

Situation 2:  Alice and  Bob took  the same course 
at  college,  and  they  are  working  together.  Their 
deadline is in a couple of hours, and they have not 
finished  yet.  Alice  does  not  know  where  Bob  is. 
She tries to reach him by phone, email, Facebook 
and Twitter, but he is not accessible. 

Afterwards, we presented the general features and the user interface of Lukap, as a 
possible solution to address both situations. The designers analyzed Lukap and could 
ask questions and discuss among them. Five participants praised the usefulness of the 
application as a way to enhance physical interaction among SNS members in a ubiquitous 
 way. Moreover, it  was  widely appreciated that  Lukap runs over a MANET, 
since no access to infrastructure-based communication networks is required. 

The  participants  filled  a  5-point  Likert  scale  survey  that  helped  us  to  understand 
how  suitable  are  the  user  interfaces  and  the  services  provided  by  Lukap.  Figure  4 
shows the items of the survey and the median score of the participants’ answers. 

The designers claim the Lukap services are easy to use and consider a broad range 
of functionalities. Some elements of the user interface have to be redesigned in order 
to make them suitable for the end-users’ mental model as Lukap currently looks like a 
chat  room.  There  were  also  suggestions  on  including  location  awareness  features, 
such as displaying contacts in a map or a radar view indicating how far and in which 
direction a user is from his/her contacts. 

Overall, I am satisfied with this application.

I would be likely to use Lukap in the future.

I liked using the interface of this application.

The offered functionalities met my …

Overall, the application is easy to use.

Fig. 4. Usability evaluation results for the current implementation of Lukap 

1

2

3

4

5

 

5.2 

Performance Evaluation 

The performance was evaluated in terms of user detection capability and communication 
 throughput.  The  first  evaluation  identified  the  maximum  delay  and  detection 
distance. The second one allowed finding out the interactions that can be supported. 
Five smartphones were used in this evaluation process, and the physical scenario involved 
in these tests was the two-floor area of the Computer Science Department at 
the University of Chile, including two stairs.  

 

214 

C. Vergara et al. 

All nodes remained stationary during the tests to ensure the comparability of the 
obtained  results.  The  user  detection  process  involved  four  scenarios  using  the  same 
experimentation  setting.  The  first  scenario  considered  the  detection  of  nodes  to  one 
hop of distance; the second one was to two hops, and so on. Five rounds were performed 
 per  each  scenario.  The  observed  variables  were  two:  (1)  the  time  spent  between 
the MANET is created and the target user is detected, and (2) the percentage of 
unsuccessful detections. The obtained results are shown in Table 2. 

Table 2. Performance results of Lukap 

1-hop 
6 sec. 

2-hops 
8 sec. 

3-hops 
17 sec. 

4-hops 
92 sec. 

 

 

Lukap  has  a  good  performance 
to detect people that 
are  at  1-2  hops.  This  may 
represent  distances  up  to 
30-40 meters in built areas, 
and  up  to  150-200  meters 
in open areas. 

 

0% 

20% 

60% 

0% 

42Kb 

14Kb 

87Kb 

127Kb 

Maximum delay 
for users detection  
Percentage of 
detection fails 
Communication 
throughput 
 
The Lukap detection process is acceptable when there are 3 hops between the target 
nodes, but we can see a 20% of fails. If the distance between nodes is 4 hops the solution 
 tends  to  be  inappropriate,  mainly  because  the  user  detection  fails  grow  up  to 
60%. In order to measure the available bandwidth between users in each scenario, we 
transferred a file weighting 4,2MB. The results indicate that the network throughput, 
when nodes are to 1 or 2 hops, is enough to exchange text and also voice messages 
among them. After that distance, just text messages are recommended. This ensures a 
certain system performance that does not impact negatively on the Lukap usability. 

6 

Conclusions and Future Work 

This  article  introduces  a  hybrid  interaction  paradigm  for  members  of  PVCs,  implemented 
 under  a  ubiquitous  application  named  Lukap.  Although  there  are  other  proposals 
 to  support  or  promote  face-to-face  interactions  among  community  members, 
none of them are able to do it in a ubiquitous way. Lukap not only promotes physical 
interaction, but also does it without requiring access to infrastructure-based communication 
networks or SNS. It is expected that an application as Lukap helps increase the 
number of face-to-face interactions, thus keeping long-term relationships [2], developing 
trust among members [18] and improving people’s mental health [4]. 

The  Lukap  evaluation  results  indicate  the  user  interface  does  not  fit  properly  the 
mental  model  of  end-users;  therefore  it  requires  improvement.  Nevertheless,  the  results 
indicate the application is perceived as useful to support physical encounters. 

The performance evaluation results indicate the application is able to detect users 
quickly when they are up to 1 or 2 hops, and in an acceptable time when there are up 
to 3 hops. This indicates the application provides an interesting coverage area to support 
these encounters; e.g. up to 50-60 meters in built areas and up to 250-300 meters 
in  open  areas.  The  communication  throughput  of  the  application  is  good  enough  to 
allow developers implementing several interaction mechanisms between the users. 

 

 

Extending Social Networking Services toward a Physical Interaction Scenario 

215 

As future work, we will redesign the Lukap user interface to include more sophisticated 
location awareness services.  

Acknowledgments. This work has been partially supported by the Fondecyt (Chile), 
grant Nº 1120207 and LACCIR, grant N° R1210LAC002. 

References 

1.  Barkhus, L., Brown, B., Bell, M., Sherwood, S., Hall, M., Chalmers, M.: From Awareness 

to Repartee: Sharing Location within Social Groups. In: Proc. of CHI 2007 (2007) 

2.  D’Aprix, R.: The Face-to-Face Communication Toolkit: Creating an Engaged Workforce. 

IABC Press, San Francisco (2009) 

3.  De  Rosa,  F.,  Malizia,  A.,  Mecella,  M.:  Disconnection  Prediction  in  Mobile  Adhoc  Networks 
for Supporting Cooperative Work. IEEE Perv. Computing 4(3), 62–70 (2005) 

4.  Goffman, E.: The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. Anchor Books, New York (1959) 
5.  Gutierrez, F., Baloian, N., Ochoa, S.F., Zurita, G.: Designing the Software Support for Partially 
Virtual Communities. In: Herskovic, V., Hoppe, H.U., Jansen, M., Ziegler, J. (eds.) 
CRIWG 2012. LNCS, vol. 7493, pp. 73–88. Springer, Heidelberg (2012) 

6.  Jones, Q., Grandhi, S.A.: P3 Systems: Putting the Place Back into Social Networks. IEEE 

Internet Computing 9(5), 38–46 (2005) 

7.  Ko, M.N., Cheek, G.P., Shehab, M., Sandhu, R.: Social-Networks Connect Services. IEEE 

Computer 43(8), 37–43 (2010) 

8.  Lampe,  C.,  Ellison,  N.,  Steinfield,  C.:  A  Face(book)  in the  Crowd:  Social  Searching  vs. 

Social Browsing. In: Proc. of CSCW 2006 (2006) 

9.  Lindqvist,  J.,  Cranshaw,  J.,  Wiese,  J.,  Hong,  J.,  Zimmerman,  J.:  I’m  the  Mayor  of  My 

House: Examining Why People Use Foursquare. In: Proc. of CHI 2011 (2011) 

10.  Lübke, R., Schuster, D., Schill, A.: MobilisGroups: Location-Based  Group Formation in 

Mobile Social Networks. In: PerCol 2011, Seattle, United States (2011) 

11.  Moran, A., Rodríguez-Covili, J., Mejia, D., Favela, J., Ochoa, S.: Supporting Informal Interaction 
 in  a  Hospital  through  Impromptu  Social  Networking.  In:  Kolfschoten,  G.,  
Herrmann, T., Lukosch, S. (eds.) CRIWG 2010. LNCS, vol. 6257, pp. 305–320. Springer, 
Heidelberg (2010) 

12.  Neyem, A., Ochoa, S.F., Pino, J.A.: Communication Patterns to Support Mobile Collaboration.
 In: Proc. of the 15th Intl. Workshop on Groupware, Douro, Portugal (2009) 

13.  Norris,  P.:  The  Bridging  and  Bonding  Role  of  Online  Communities.  Press/Politics 7(3),  

3–13 (2002) 

14.  Rheingold, H.: The Virtual Community. Addison-Wesley, Massachusetts (1993) 
15.  Ridings, C., Gefen, D., Arinze, B.: Some antecedents and effects of trust in virtual communities.
 Journal of Strategic Information Systems 11, 271–295 (2002) 

16.  Rodríguez-Covili,  J.,  Ochoa,  S.F.,  Pino,  J.A.,  Messeguer,  R.,  Medina,  E.,  Royo,  D.:  A 
Communication Infrastructure to Ease the Development of Mobile Collaborative Applications.
 Journal of Network and Computer Applications 34(6), 1883–1893 (2011) 

17.  Schuster,  D.,  Springer,  T.,  Schill,  A.:  Service-Based  Development  of  Mobile  Real-Time 

Collaboration Applications for Social Networks. In: PerCol 2010, Germany (2010) 

18.  Westerlund, M., Rajala, R., Nykänen, K., Järvensivu, T.: Trust and commitment in social 
networking  –  Lessons  learned  from  two  empirical  studies.  In:  Proc.  of  25th  IMP  2009 
(2009) 

 

