Visitrack: A Pervasive Service for Monitoring the Social

Activity of Older Adults Living at Home

Alonso Gaete1, Francisco J. Gutierrez1(✉), Sergio F. Ochoa1, Pablo Guerrero1,

and André Wyzykowski2

1 Department of Computer Science, University of Chile, Beauchef 851, 3rd Floor, Santiago, Chile

{agaete,frgutier,sochoa,pguerrer}@dcc.uchile.cl

2 Statistics and Informatics Department, Federal University of Santa Catarina,
Campus Universitário Trindade, Cx.P. 476, Florianópolis, SC 88040-900, Brazil

abvwmc@gmail.com

Abstract.  Advances in medical science allow people to live longer and more
independently than some decades ago. However, this does not directly help older
adults improve their mental wellbeing. Several studies show that elderly people
usually suﬀer from some level of social isolation that negatively impacts on their
physical and mental conditions. As a way to address such a problem, this paper
presents Visitrack, a pervasive and unobtrusive service conceived to monitor the
social activity of older adults living at home. Based on sensing data retrieved and
processed by the  system, it can take  several  actions. For instance, informing
family members and friends about long periods with no social activity at the older
adult’s  home.  The  proposed  service  has  been  evaluated  through  a  controlled
experimental study, obtaining highly accurate results.
Keywords: Older adults · Aging in place · Ambient assisted living · Monitoring ·
Social interaction · Empirical study

1

Introduction

Worldwide population is progressively getting older at a dramatic speed, given the
current advances in health provision, technology support, and prosperous living condi‐
tions that extend the life expectancy of people. This aging phenomenon represents a
challenge to the public social and health services of many developed and developing
countries, mainly because of the costs and required eﬀort to sustain the independent
living of older adults. Over the last years, several studies have identiﬁed aging in place
strategies as a potential solution to deal with this situation (e.g., [17, 24–26, 34]).

Aging in place is generally understood as the ability to live in one’s own home and
community safely, independently, and comfortably, regardless of age, income, or ability
level. Typically, Ambient Assisted Living (AAL) technology is envisioned as a facili‐
tator for improving the wellbeing of older adults and extending the period in which these
people can live autonomously at their home.

Jointly with this tendency of improving the living conditions of older adults, it has
appeared  an  antagonist  tendency  that  reduces  the  time  that  family  members  have

© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
S.F. Ochoa et al. (Eds.): UCAmI 2017, LNCS 10586, pp. 520–530, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-67585-5_52

Visitrack: A Pervasive Service for Monitoring the Social Activity

521

available to devote to spare activities [20], such as interacting face-to-face with their
older adults [16]. Several reasons justify this tendency; for instance: the need of women
to work for ensuring the sustainability of their own family, an increase on the length of
working shifts, and the desire to spend time in leisure activities.

Face-to-face interactions are a key factor that helps keep older adults emotionally
up, physically active, and motivated [2]. In that respect, a low level of social interaction
tends to produce depression and other mental health issues, particularly among older
adults [10, 11], as well as a reduced life expectancy in this user group [18, 19, 27]. In
other words, it does not make sense to try improving the wellbeing of older adults without
considering social support as a fundamental aspect to address. Several researchers state
that face-to-face social support is the cornerstone for the quality of human life [2, 6, 13,
21]. Therefore, addressing this concern results in technology with high impact in the
quality of life and overall wellbeing of older adults. In particular, this turns critical for
those people that have small social networks and spend long time periods at home, i.e.,
those at high risk of becoming socially isolated. Although the proportion of socially
isolated older adults varies across diﬀerent cultures and societies, it is clear that this is
currently a global issue [8].

In order to address this challenge considering the needs of both older adults and other
family members, this paper presents a pervasive service to monitor the face-to-face
social activity conducted by older adults living independently at home. This information
would allow the system to promote visits to the older adult when required, balance the
load of performing these visits among family members, and keep a permanent diagnosis
of the social connectedness of the older adult.

Identifying  visits of  family members and friends  to the older adults is a highly
valuable asset for addressing this challenge. However, accomplishing with this task is
not trivial, since the acquired information must be accurate, reliable, objective, and
recorded on time. Moreover, the monitoring process should non-intrusive, hopefully
pervasive,  secure,  and  consider  privacy  restrictions  that  limit  technology  adoption
among  older  adults  [15].  Although  literature  reports  several  proposals  for  in-home
activity  recognition  targeted  to  older  adults,  most  of  them  fail  in  simultaneously
addressing all these quality requirements.

The monitoring  service presented in this article, named Visitrack, addresses the
stated requirements in order to extend the capabilities of the SocialConnector system
[23]. Through a controlled experimental study, we evaluated the overall performance
of Visitrack in a simulated setting under lab conditions. The obtained results have been
highly accurate, both in terms of overall precision (90.5%) and recall (93.5%), as well
as unobtrusive and useful for older adults and their family members.

The  rest  of  the  paper  is  structured  as  follows.  Section  2  reviews  related  work.
Section 3 describes Visitrack and presents its main functionality. Section 4 reports the
conducted  empirical  evaluation  and  discusses  the  obtained  results.  Finally,  Sect.  5
concludes and provides perspectives on future work.

522

A. Gaete et al.

2 Related Work

Monitoring incoming visits to  the home  of older  adults is  the ﬁrst step of  a larger
endeavor aiming to provide eﬀective social support in aging in place scenarios. While
the problem of remote sensing and activity monitoring of older adults is not new in AAL,
it has been strongly reliant on external hardware [9, 33].

On the one hand, previous attempts to provide in-home monitoring to older adults
use ambient and wearable sensors to collect biomedical, physiological, and activity data
in the form of a wireless network installed in or around the house, appliances, and furni‐
ture [3, 29]. On the other hand, devices like smartphones [7] and Microsoft Kinect [4,
28] have also proven useful for instrumenting pervasive monitoring of older adults.

McDuﬀ et al. [22] followed a more holistic approach involving a multimodal sensor
set-up for continuous logging of audio, visual, physiological and contextual data. Using
a webcam, a Microsoft Kinect device, an ambient microphone, and an electro-dermal
wrist sensor along a portable GPS carried by the user, the proposed system enabled user
reﬂection on their aﬀective state through an interactive interface.

Following  a  diﬀerent  line  of  reasoning,  Fogarty  et  al.  [14]  through  an  in-home
deployment  trial  reﬂected  on  trade-oﬀs  regarding  instrumentation  and  quantity  and
quality of collected information. Similarly, Demiris et al. [12] state that older adults
generally accept sensors and actuators once they are assimilated as being part of their
surrounding environment. For instance, this could be the case of smart home systems
or residence care facilities already equipped with sensor networks.

While valuable, prior research shows limitations with regard to the pervasiveness of
these systems in line with the expectations of older adults about technology acceptance.
Instrumenting a house is a challenge, since elderly people perceive this task as disruptive,
diﬃcult to achieve, and expensive. These concerns have been reported as being prob‐
lematic to older adults, particularly in terms of technology adoption [15]. In that respect,
Birnholtz and Jones-Rounds [5] state that aging in place schemas need to foster a sense
of independence, while simultaneously enable monitoring and frequent interaction in
an unobtrusive way. Vines et al. [31] emphasize that mediating the caregiving space of
older adults with AAL technology does have an impact on the involved stakeholders,
which goes beyond non-invasive sensing. Issues like explicit reassurance, information
control, prompt feedback, and access to activity data all need to be addressed with regard
to acceptance and adoption of assistive technologies.

As a ﬁrst attempt to design a system for monitoring incoming visits at the home of
an older adult, we initially rely on state-of-the-art algorithms for detecting and identi‐
fying people within a family network. Viola and Jones [32] conceived an object detection
framework based on the sequential identiﬁcation of image features through an iterative
probabilistic approach. With proper training, this system works fairly well for detecting
people faces under multiple lighting conditions and diﬀerent levels of resolutions, even
in  the  cases  with  a  noisy  training  dataset.  Although  the  obtained  results  from  this
approach seem promising for detecting faces in standalone images, it shows limitations
in the case of properly recognizing people from a larger set, such as accurately identi‐
fying what family members visited an older adult over a long period of time.

Visitrack: A Pervasive Service for Monitoring the Social Activity

523

In order to overcome this limitation, literature reports several classiﬁcation models
supporting  people  identiﬁcation  from  a  trained  dataset  of  photos.  This  approach  is
commonly  based  on  extracting  particular  features  from  the  image—which  varies
between  models—and  comparing  these  features  against  the  training  dataset.  For
instance, Turk and Pentland [30] follow an approach based on principal component
analysis to reduce the dimensionality of images and induce a classiﬁer comparing the
target image with those in the training set. Ahonen et al. [1] identify local binary pattern
histograms to compare images and classify them following similitude measures, which
displays fairly good results in practice according to a literature survey conducted by
Zhao et al. [35].

Building upon these lines of research, our proposal explicitly address factors that
contribute  to  improve  technology  acceptance  by  older  adults,  such  as  perceived
usability, usefulness, availability, and ubiquity. Therefore, the odds for an eﬀective inhome 
deployment and acceptance of Visitrack seem increased.

3 System Design

Visitrack was implemented as an extension—running in background—of the Social‐
Connector system [23]. The latter is a ubiquitous application that allows older adults to
interact with other family members exchanging messages, family pictures, and through
videoconferences (Fig. 1).

Fig. 1. Architecture of the physical environment

The service uses the frontal camera and the microphone of the tablet. When this
application detects a person, it uploads a picture of his/her face to the server. Then, the
server runs a process to recognize that face. Regardless of the result of such an operation,
it records the visit in a log ﬁle that keeps the history of the social activity in that house.

524

A. Gaete et al.

If the face of the visitor is not recognized, family community managers can manually
tag it using a particular software module. This new information is then used as input for
future automatic face recognitions. The information about the social activity of the older
adults can be periodically sent to particular family members, such as those acting as
caregivers or monitors, as a way to making them aware about the social activity status
of the older adult, deliver alerts, or try persuading other family members to visit the
elderly person.

The system architecture shows data coupling among various components of the
system; e.g., between the Visitrack client and the server, and also among the services
provided by the server. This decoupling of the functionality (or data coupling) allows
the system to evolve its components in a quite autonomous way. For instance, it is
possible to reengineer the social activity diagnosis module (Fig. 1), without the need to
change source code in the rest of the server components. The same happens if we decide
to evolve the visit registration or people identiﬁcation modules, which represents an
advantage for the system.

4 Visitrack Client

This service uses the microphone of the tablet PC to capture samples of the environ‐
mental noise. If the detected sound intensity is over certain threshold, then the service
assumes that a potential social activity is being conducted at home, so it runs the moni‐
toring process. This starts by activating the frontal camera of the device and tries to
detect a  phace  in  the  physical  environment  using  video  (Fig.  2).  Such  detection  is
performed using the FaceRecognizer algorithm available in the OpenCV library1. Once
the algorithm detects a face, the service takes a picture of the scene, and then crops all
the faces in the picture using the haarcascade algorithm (also available in OpenCV).

Client Service 
(autonomosly)

Deactivate Frontal 

Camera

Yes

Long Time 

without 
Detection

No

Capture the 

Environmental 

Noise

Audio
Record

Potential
Activity

Yes

Activate Frontal 

Camera

Perform Face 
Detection using 

Video 

Take a Picture 

and Crop the Face

Delivery 
Pending 
Pictures

 No 

Face
Picture

Store Locally the 

Face Picture

Send Pending 
Pictures to the 

Server

Face

Pictures

Server

 No 

Internet
Access?

Yes

Fig. 2. Information processing ﬂow at the client side

Finally, once cropped, the faces are stored locally in the device, and then sent to the
server via Internet. If the connection between the client and the server is not available,
the  face  pictures  are  kept  in  the  local  storage  until  the  communication  link  is

1 http://www.opencv.org/.

Visitrack: A Pervasive Service for Monitoring the Social Activity

525

reestablished. In the server side there is a listener agent that is permanently waiting for
new pictures.

4.1 Visitrack Server
When a picture with a face is received from the tablet, the system extracts its charac‐
teristics through the Image Processing Module (depicted in Fig. 1) that uses Local Binary
Pattern Histograms [1]. Using the picture description, the People Identiﬁcation Module
intends to recognize the identity of the person by matching this description with those
stored in the database of potential visitors for such a family (i.e., the Visitors Record).
Figure 3 shows the information ﬂow between each component of the Visitrack server
application.

Delivery of Social 

Information

System 

(autonomosly)

 Notifications 

Family Members /
Formal Caregivers

Visit Registration 

Module

System 

(autonomosly)

Social Visit 

Record

Social Activity 
Record (log 

file)

Face
Picture

Get Face Picture 
Characteristics

Face
Picture

Server Listener

Agent

Determine Visitor 
Identity Using the 
Visitors Record

Successful

Identification?

Store Record in 

 Yes 

Social Activity Log 

File

No

Visitors
Record

Store Record + 

Picture in Pending 
Identificat. Visitors

Pending 

Identification 

Record

Update Social 
Activity Status

Tag Pending  
Face Pictures

Retrieve Pending 
Identification Face 

Pictures

Community
Managers

Visitrack Server

People Tagging Module

Fig. 3.

Information processing ﬂow at the server side

If the person in the new picture is identiﬁed, then such a picture is deleted and a
record is added to the system log ﬁle (i.e., the Social Activity Record) alongside contex‐
tual metadata related to such a visit. In other case, the cropped photo is stored in the
Pending Identiﬁcation Record. At any time, as indicated with dashed lines in Fig. 3, the
community managers can manually label these images, which triggers a reprocessing
of the pending pictures and an updates all the records in the server in order to keep a
coherent status of the Social Visits and Visitors Records. Using such a mechanism, the
system is fed and retrained.

Periodically, the Visit Registration Module processes the system log ﬁle, determines
the length and frequency of the visits, and stores such information in the Social Visit
Record. The information of these visits can then be used by the system to keep informed,
according to a set of rules, family members, community managers, and formal care‐
givers.

4.2 Visit Registration
Accurately determining the length of a visit is a challenge for the system, given that the
video recording  process  only  captures  a part of the  older adult’s house.  Therefore,

526

A. Gaete et al.

locating strategically the camera helps increase the chance for eﬀectively capturing a
visit.

The  visit  registration  process uses  as  input the  stored  information  in  the  Social
Activity  Record, which corresponds to several triples ordered chronologically. Each
triple has an ID that identiﬁes the tablet PC, the ID of the person captured by the camera,
and a timestamp indicating the instant in which such a picture was taken.

In order to determine the visits, the whole time period to be monitored is discretized
using short time blocks (e.g., slots of 2 or 3 min), where each block has an ID. Then,
the triples in the Social Activity Record are reviewed chronologically, where every time
block that matches with a certain face capture is consequently labeled for each person.
Multiples captures for the same time block are ignored.

Consecutive time blocks having the same person are deﬁned as the time range of the
visit, which includes a beginning time for the visit and an associated duration for the
visit. If the number of time blocks between two consecutive visits is small (e.g., 1–4
blocks), the system assumes that it is the same visit and the camera was not able to
capture the visitor all the time. In other case, the system assumes that they correspond
to diﬀerent visits.

The ID of the tablet PC, the ID of the visitor, the beginning time of the visit, and its
duration conform a tuple that is maintained in the Social Visit Record. Although this
information is coarse-grained, it is still highly valuable for the system given that it can
be directly used by the system to decide when to deliver a notiﬁcation, identify a target
person to persuade or keep informed, or provide visual awareness information about the
social status of the older adults. These latter mechanisms will be designed and evaluated
as part of future work.

5 Evaluation Results

In  order  to assess  the overall  performance  of  Visitrack,  we  conducted  a controlled
experiment simulating three independent family meetings. Each meeting was held in a
living room that was equipped with a tablet PC running a version of the SocialConnector
system that embedded Visitrack. As hardware support, we used a tablet Samsung Galaxy
Tab E, 9.6, running over WiFi.

In every scenario, participants were prompted to enter and leave the room simulating
visits to an older adult. The authors kept independent records of who entered and left
the room, and at what times. These notes then served to compute the ground truth for
evaluating Visitrack. Each case scenario was individually and independently observed
in time periods of 2 h, replicated over a period of two days.

As performance metrics, we computed the service precision (i.e., how many visits
were eﬀectively conducted with regard to the total number of those detected by the
system), recall (i.e., how many visits were eﬀectively detected by the system with regard
to the total number of those performed by the study participants), and F1 score (i.e., the
harmonic mean between precision and recall, hence representing a balance measure).
These metrics were selected because they are commonly used in information retrieval

Visitrack: A Pervasive Service for Monitoring the Social Activity

527

for evaluating the performance of classiﬁer models. Table 1 reports the obtained results
in the experiment.

Table 1. Performance of Visitrack in simulated family meetings

Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3

Precision
0.909
0.906
0.901

Recall
0.952
0.935
0.917

F1 score
0.930
0.920
0.909

A 100%  of  the  simulated  visits  were detected, even  if they lasted less  than ten
seconds. If the person is in the capturing area of the camera during 2–3 s, and his/her
face is in a frontal or semi-frontal position with regard the camera, the system is going
to detect and record that visit. The precision shown in Table 1 is high, although the
system identiﬁed as visit some situations that were not as such. However, these false
detections can be identiﬁed and ﬁxed by the family community managers using the
people tagging module (Fig. 1). For instance, if the detected object (e.g., a mug) is
recognized by the system as a face, then it is enough that such an object be labeled as
“no person” in the pending identiﬁcation record. Therefore, the system will iterate over
all the pending visits and recalculate them with this new base of knowledge. Fixing these
situations takes family community managers only a couple of minutes and allows the
system to increase its detection precision to 100% of the visits.

Concerning the obtained recall, there were only some few short visits that were not
recorded properly. In these cases, visits involved several people that were not recorded
properly. Although most visitors were detected, some of them were missing. Finally,
considering the F1 score, we can see that the algorithm of visit detection not only is
highly accurate but also reliable. The social information that it records is objective and
is available to be used by the system once it arrives to the server. Therefore, it turns
possible to make on-time decisions or deliver messages based upon this information.
These are highly desirable quality attributes for this type of systems.

Given that the monitoring process ran in background, users were not really aware of
the monitoring activity, which provided pervasiveness to the service. Both the infor‐
mation stored in the tablet and the server, as well as the data communicated to the server
travelled through secure—encrypted—channels. This provides an important security
level to the system.

On the other hand, only face pictures are stored and communicated from the tablet
to the server, and those pictures are deleted once communicated to the server (in the case
of the data stored in the tablet) or once the identity of the person has been established
(in case of the server). Moreover, the information about the visits is aggregated to use
only by the system, which provides some privacy protection to the visitors. Furthermore,
given that all participants are relatives or friends of monitored older adults, and since
the social interaction among them does not represent a taboo or something to negatively
care about, this aspect was not an issue for the people participating in the evaluation
process. Indeed, through informal observation on the process, study participants and
older adults proved somewhat favorable to the installation of Visitrack in their own
homes  if  they  had  the  chance  to  do  so.  This  will  be  formally  evaluated  through  a

528

A. Gaete et al.

controlled in-the-wild experiment as future work. Similarly, the quality attributes shown
by the proposed monitoring service make us expect a contribution of it in other appli‐
cation  domains,  such  as  monitoring  social  activities  of  persons  suﬀering  autism,
Asperger, or in the case of informal caregivers of chronically-ill patients or handicapped
people.

6 Conclusions and Future Work

Aging in place is envisioned as an instrumental strategy to deal with the accelerated
aging process experimented by the worldwide population over the last decades. This
strategy usually requires technology—such as AAL systems—to support the daily living
activities of older adults. In particular, a key need to address is the social support of
elderly people within their close social networks. Particularly, literature acknowledges
that  face-to-face  social  support  is  the  cornerstone  for  improving  wellbeing  and
sustaining acceptable levels of quality of life [2, 6, 13, 21]. Therefore, it is important to
consider this value when conceiving AAL systems targeted to support older adults living
at home. However, this consideration is also constrained by quality requirements that
are related to how older adults perceive and expect to accept domestic technology. In
that respect, it turns equally important that social supporting solutions be accurate, nonintrusive,
 reliable, objective, and that they record and provide information on time with
a particular focus on sustaining people’s privacy.

Given that most of the solutions reported in the literature for monitoring social
activities usually consider broader and less restrictive interaction scenarios, they are
particularly not concerned by addressing the stated quality attributes. As a way to bridge
this gap, the Visitrack service contributes with an alternative strategy to monitoring the
social activity of older adults, with a particular emphasis on not disrupting the living
and social ecosystems of elderly users.

This work also shows that an excessive instrumentation is not necessarily required
to  monitor  complex  ecosystems,  without  compromising  pervasiveness,  information
accuracy, and privacy. Although the reported results are still preliminary, we expect this
research helps positively impact the quality of life and wellbeing of older adults.

The next step in this research initiative includes replicating the evaluation study in
real-life scenarios, by monitoring social activity directly at home. We also envisage to
deﬁne decision rules to promote and balance the engagement of family members in
providing face-to-face social support to their older adults.

Acknowledgments.  This work has been partially supported by the Fondecyt Project (Chile),
grant: 1150252. The work of Francisco J. Gutierrez has been supported by the Ph.D. Scholarship
Program of Conicyt Chile (CONICYT-PCHA/Doctorado Nacional/2013-21130075).

Visitrack: A Pervasive Service for Monitoring the Social Activity

529

References

1. Ahonen, T., Hadid, A., Pietikäinen, M.: Face Recognition with Local Binary Patterns. In:
Pajdla, T., Matas, J. (eds.) ECCV 2004. LNCS, vol. 3021, pp. 469–481. Springer, Heidelberg
(2004). doi:10.1007/978-3-540-24670-1_36

2. Albrecht,  T.L.,  Burleson,  B.R.,  Sarason,  I.:  Meaning  and  Methods  in  the  Study  of
Communication and Social Support: An Introduction. Commun. Res. 19(2), 149–153 (1992)
3. Atallah, L., Lo, B., Yang, G.-Z., Siegemund, F.: Wirelessly accessible sensor populations
(WASP) for elderly care monitoring. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on
Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare (PervasiveHealth 2008). IEEE Press, New
York (2008). doi:10.1109/PCTHEALTH.2008.4571011

4. Bieryla, K.A.: Xbox kinect training to improve clinical measures of balance in older adults:

a pilot study. Aging Clin. Exp. Res. 28(3), 451–457 (2016)

5. Birnholtz,  J.,  Jones-Rounds,  M.:  Independence  and  interaction:  understanding  seniors’
privacy  and  awareness  needs  for  aging  in  place.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  ACM  SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2010), pp. 143–152. ACM Press,
New York (2010)

6. Braithwaite, D.O., Waldron, V.R., Finn, J.: Communication of social support in computermediated 
groups for people with disabilities. Health Commun. 11(2), 123–151 (1999)

7. Castro, L.A., Favela, J., Quintana, E., Perez, M.: Behavioral data gathering for assessing
functional status and health in older adults using mobile phones. Pers. Ubiquit. Comput.
19(2), 379–391 (2015)

8. Cloutier-Fisher, D., Kobayashi, K., Smith, A.: The subjective dimension of social isolation:
a qualitative investigation of older adults’ experiences in small social support networks. J.
Aging Stud. 25(4), 407–414 (2011)

9. Cook, D.J., Das, S.K.: How smart are our environments? An updated look at the state of the

art. Pervasive Mob. Comput. 3, 53–73 (2007)

10. Cornwell, E.Y., Waite, L.J.: Social disconnectedness, perceived isolation, and health among

older adults. J. Health Soc. Behav. 50(1), 31–48 (2009)

11. Coyle, C.E., Dugan, E.: Social isolation, loneliness and health among older adults. J. Aging

Health 24(8), 1346–1363 (2012)

12. Demiris, G., Hensel, B.K., Skubic, M., Rantz, M.: Senior residents’ perceived need of and
preferences for “smart home” sensor technologies. Int. J. Technol. Assess. Health Care 24(1),
120–124 (2008)

13. Dickson-Markman,  F.,  Shern,  D.L.:  Social  support  and  health  in  the  elderly.  J.  Appl.

Commun. Res. 18(1), 49–63 (1990)

14. Fogarty, J., Au, C., Hudson, S.E.: Sensing from the basement: a feasibility study of unobtrusive
and  low-cost  home  activity  recognition.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  ACM  Symposium  on  User
Interface Software and Technology (UIST 2006), pp. 91–100. ACM Press, New York (2006)

15. Garg, V., Camp, L.J., Lorenzen-Huber, L., Shankar, K., Connelly, K.: Privacy concerns in

assisted living technologies. Ann. Telecommun. 69(1), 75–88 (2014)

16. Gutierrez, F.J., Ochoa, S.F.: Mom, I do have a family.: attitudes, agreements, and expectations
on the interaction with chilean older adults. In: Proceedings of the ACM Conference on
Computer-Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing (CSCW 2016), pp. 1402–
1411. ACM Press, New York (2016)

17. Gutierrez, F.J., Ochoa, S.F.: It takes at least two to Tango: understanding the cooperative
nature of elderly caregiving in Latin America. In: Proceedings of the ACM Conference on
Computer-Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing (CSCW’17). ACM Press,
New York, pp. 1618–1630 (2017)

530

A. Gaete et al.

18. Holt-Lunstad, J., Smith, T.B., Baker, M., Harris, T., Stephenson, D.: Loneliness and social
isolation as risk factors for mortality: a meta-analytic review. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 10(2),
227–237 (2015)

19. Holwerda,  T.J.,  Beekman,  A.T.,  Deeg,  D.J.,  Stek,  M.L.,  van  Tilburg,  T.G.,  Visser,  P.J.,
Schmand, B., Jonker, C., Schoevers, R.A.: Increased risk of mortality associated with social
isolation in older men: only when feeling lonely? Results from the Amsterdam study of the
elderly (AMSTEL). Psychol. Med. 42(4), 843–853 (2012)

20. Ilies, R., Dimotakis, N., de Pater, I.E.: Psychological and physiological reactions to high

workloads: implications for well-being. Pers. Psychol. 63(2), 407–436 (2010)

21. LaRocca, M.A., Scogin, F.R.: The eﬀect of social support on quality of life in older adults

receiving cognitive behavioral therapy. Clin. Gerontol. 38(2), 131–148 (2015)

22. McDuﬀ,  D.,  Karlson,  A.,  Kapoor,  A.,  Roseway,  A.,  Czerwinski,  M.:  AﬀectAura:  An
Intelligent System for Emotional Memory. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2012), pp. 849–858 ACM Press, New York,
(2012)

23. Muñoz, D., Gutierrez, F.J., Ochoa, S.F., Baloian, N.: SocialConnector: a ubiquitous system
to ease the social interaction among family community members. Comput. Syst. Sci. Eng.
30(1), 57–68 (2015)

24. Mynatt, E.D., Melenhorst, A.-S., Fisk, A.-D., Rogers, W.A.: Aware technologies for aging
in place: understanding user needs and attitudes. IEEE Pervasive Comput. 3(2), 36–41 (2004)
25. Procter, R., Greenhalgh, T., Wherton, J., Sugarhood, P., Rounceﬁeld, M., Hinder, S.: The
day-to-day co-production of ageing in place. Comput. Support. Coop. Work 23(3), 245–267
(2014)

26. Rowan J., Mynatt, E.D.: Digital family portrait ﬁeld trial: support for aging in place. In:
Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI’05). ACM Press, New York, pp. 521–530 (2005)

27. Steptoe, A., Shankar, A., Demakakos, P., Wardle, J.: Social isolation, loneliness, and all-cause
mortality in older men and women. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110(15), 5797–5801 (2013)
28. Stone, E.E., Skubic, M.: Fall detection in homes of older adults using the microsoft kinect.

IEEE J Biomed Health Inform. 19(1), 290–301 (2015)

29. Suryadevara, N.K., Mukhopadhyay, S.C., Wang, R., Rayudu, R.K.: Forecasting the behavior
of an elderly using wireless sensors data in a smart home. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 26, 2641–
2652 (2013)

30. Turk, M., Pentland, A.: Eigenfaces for recognition. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 3(1), 71–86 (1991)
31. Vines,  J.,  Lindsay,  S., Pritchard,  G.W., Lie, M.,  Greathead,  D.,  Olivier, P.,  Brittain,  K.:
Making  family  care  work:  dependence,  privacy  and  remote  home  monitoring  telecare
systems.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  ACM  International  Joint  Conference  on  Pervasive  and
Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp’13). ACM Press, New York, pp. 607–616 (2013)

32. Viola, P., Jones, M.J.: Robust real-time face detection. Int. J. Comput. Vision 57(2), 137–154

(2004)

33. Wagner, F., Basran, J., Dal Bello-Haas, V.: A review of monitoring technology for use with

older adults. J. Geriatr. Phys. Ther. 35(1), 28–34 (2012)

34. Wiles, J.L., Leibing, A., Guberman, N., Reeve, J., Allen, R.S.E.: The meaning of “aging in

place” to older people. Gerontologist 52(3), 357–366 (2012)

35. Zhao, W., Chellappa, E., Phillips, P., Rosenfeld, A.: Face Recognition: A Literature Survey.

ACM Comput. Surv. 35(4), 399–458 (2003)

