A Mobile Portfolio to Support Communities of Practice 

in Science Education 

Oriel Herrera1, Sergio F. Ochoa2, Andrés Neyem2, Maurizio Betti3,  

Roberto Aldunate4, and David A. Fuller5 

1 Informatics Engineering School, Universidad Católica de Temuco, 

Manuel Montt 56, Temuco, Chile 
oherrera@uctemuco.cl  

2 Computer Science Department, Universidad de Chile, 

Blanco Encalada 2120, Santiago, Chile 

{sochoa, aneyem}@dcc.uchile.cl 

3 Education Department, Universidad Católica de Temuco, 

Manuel Montt 56, Temuco, Chile 

mbetti@uct.cl 

4 Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Illinois, 

205 N Mathews Av.,Urbana, Illinois, USA 

aldurate@uiuc.edu 

5 Computer Science Department, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, 

V. Mackenna 4860, Santiago, Chile 

dfuller@ing.puc.cl 

Abstract.  Practice  activities  are  a  key  issue  for  science  education  students. 
Typically, these activities are carried out by a community of practice (practicing 
students  and  professors)  using  physical  or  centralized  electronic  portfolios. 
However, these alternatives are limited when the community members need to 
share  the  portfolio  resources,  any  time  and  anywhere.  This  limitation  is  also 
present  when  support  for  high  interactivity  among  these  persons  is  required. 
This  paper  presents  a  new  kind of  portfolio  which  is  able  to  work  in  autonomous,
  client-server,  and  peer-to-peer  manners.  This  mobile  portfolio  is  fully 
distributed; therefore, it improves the flexibility to conduct interactions or share 
portfolio resources among the members of a community of practice. The functionality 
and stability of the tool have been tested by the developers and the results 
obtained are encouraging. The use of this distributed portfolio is expected 
to  help  science  students  and  professors  to  enhance  practice  activities,  interactions 
and interchange of experiences and resources.  

Keywords:  Mobile  Workspaces,  Mobile  Portfolios,  Communities  of  Practice, 
Education. 

1   Introduction 

Practice  activities  are  key  issues  in  science  education  studies.  These  activities  transform 
theoretical knowledge into specific actions. Dewey stated that theoretical knowledge 
and its application are strongly related; therefore the learning process takes place 

D. Schuler (Ed.): Online Communities and Social Comput., HCII 2007, LNCS 4564, pp. 416–425, 2007. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007 

 

A Mobile Portfolio to Support Communities of Practice in Science Education 

417 

mainly  during  practice  activities  [1].  This  learning  process  involves  identifying  and 
overcoming the challenges that a community of practice (practicing students and pro-
fessors)  has  to  face  in  order  to  reach  a  significant  goal.  This  learning  approach  is 
aligned with the situated experience theory [2] and social practice theory [3], [4]. In 
addition, the learning is part of the formative design processes usually applied in several 
professions [5]. 

The  Universidad  Catolica  de  Temuco,  Chile,  has  used  practice  activities  in  early 
stages of the science education studies. The obtained results have been very positive 
[6]. These practice activities  become  more important in later stages of the  students’ 
studies, provided they are dedicated to these activities full-time.  

Typically, these students work during 3 or 4 hours daily in an Educational Center 
assigned by the University. There, they put all their knowledge into practice and become 
more confident about their actions. A supervisor guides and monitors the activities 
of the practicing students (see Fig. 1). In this scenario the students can also use a 
senior teacher to validate their activities or interchange experiences.  Interactions with 
peer students are useful to validate ideas or gain knowledge about a specific issue. 

Educational Center 
Partners

University

Partners

Supervisor

Senior Teachers

Practicing
Student

Tutor

 

Fig. 1. Type of interactions between a practicing student and the rest of the actors 

At the same time, these students can interact with peers and with their tutor in the 
university  scenario.  The  tutor  is  the  main  person  responsible  for  the  practitioners’ 
instruction and  guidance. They are all part of a community of practice in charge of 
carrying out a global instruction process for a specific student group. These communities 
are characterized by a strong negotiation of the meaning of practical experiences 
[2], [9]. 

In order to show their progress in the practice activities, each student implements a 
“portfolio”.  The  creation  and  maintenance  of  these  portfolios  involves:  planning, 
activities execution, and creation of documents and records related to the performed 
activities  [7].  All  evidence  that  a  student  collects  during  the  practice  activities  is 

418 

O. Herrera et al. 

stored in said portfolio. This evidence is classified according to a national cataloging 
system [8]. 

Currently these portfolios are implemented as a physical file, which is the least expensive 
solution, more easily adopted by any organization or student. Unfortunately, 
the  physical  portfolios  have  several  operative  limitations  in  sharing  the  information 
they contain: making a copy of a document is not easy and it could be a slow process, 
delivering a document requires having the sender and receiver in a face to face situation,
  and  the  delivery  process  may  also  be  unreliable  and/or  slow  (e.g.  post  mail). 
These  are  just  some  of  the  reasons  why  sharing  physical  documents  is  not  the  best 
option. In order to overcome these limitations, the authors created a digital portfolio, 
following the client-server paradigm. 

Fig. 2. Tutors’ view of the online portfolios 

 

This  portfolio  is  a  shared  space  where  the  students  can  store  public  and  private 
digital information. Students’ public information can be seen only by peers, tutors or 
supervisors.  The  information  in  the  public  space  can  be  commented  on  and  copied 
into  the  portfolio  of  any  student,  tutor,  or  supervisor.  Fig.  2  shows  the  view  of  the 
tutors’ functionalities implemented in the online portfolio. 

Although  this  tool  helps  solve  several  problems  of  the  physical  portfolios,  some 
important limitations can not be overcome. An example of this is the software capability 
to allow access to shared information if a server is not available. Flexibility is 

 

A Mobile Portfolio to Support Communities of Practice in Science Education 

419 

an important requirement for any solution intending to be appropriate for supporting 
the interaction among  the community  members. Therefore, the solution should  support 
the interaction almost anytime and anywhere. 

Mobile computing technology and wireless networks could help community members 
 overcome  the  current  limitations  in  sharing  experiences  and  accessing  portfolio 
information. For this reason, this paper presents a mobile portfolio to enhance collaborative 
learning and interaction among communities of practices in science education. 

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 defines interaction problems 
 among  community  members.  Section  3  presents  related  work.  Section  4  describes 
features of the implemented mobile portfolio that support interactions among 
these actors. Finally, section 5 presents the conclusions and future work. 

2   Problem Definition 

In science education, the student instruction process is characterized by a high degree 
of social interaction. Such interactions can be categorized as formal or informal. 
 
Formal interactions. These interactions are carried out between the practicing student 
and  the  supervisor  in  order  to  determine  the  real  progress  in  the  student  portfolio. 
They involve a supervisor and a group of practicing students. This type of interaction 
is also carried out in group meetings where the students share experiences.  There, the 
supervisor helps students to understand specific situations or to organize the discussions.
 Formal interactions can also be carried out between the practicing students and 
senior  professors  that  belong  to  the  educational  institution  where  the  students  are 
practicing. These professors help the student to understand and assimilate the lessons 
learned, and to make possible corrections in the practical activities the student is conducting.
   
 
Informal interactions. These interactions are present when a practicing student meets 
with his/her peers in the educational center. These interactions are usually focused on 
interchanging  experiences  and  conducting  a  pre-validation  of  these  experiences.  Informal 
 interactions  are  also  conducted  by  the  educational  center’s  professors  when 
they  provide  students  with  practical  situations  and  lessons  to  be  learned  during  the 
time period they instruct other students. 

All  these  interactions  could  provide  new  material  for  the  student  portfolio,  instances 
 for  sharing  information  or  portfolio  review.  By  analyzing  the  interactions 
among students, supervisor and tutors, and the diversity of places where such interaction 
can be performed, it is clear that a new supporting tool is required by the community 
members. The online portfolio [7] is not appropriate to support ad-hoc meetings.
 Provided that said solution depends on a central server that stores the students’ 
portfolios, the distributed access to these resources depends on the server availability. 
However,  having  centralized  information  allows  professors  to  get  updated  information 
about all the students’ portfolios. 

This paper presents an extension to the online portfolio in order to allow both centralized 
 and  decentralized  access  to  and  distribution  of  portfolio  information.  Each 

420 

O. Herrera et al. 

portfolio is now an autonomous unit which can be connected to a server or the portfolio 
of any student on-demand. The coherence of the information is maintained through 
data  synchronization  operations,  which  are  executed  on-demand.  This  functionality 
extension is focused on supporting sharing information, because in face to face meetings,
 it does not make sense to use computer supported interaction tools except those 
for data sharing and data synchronization. 

3   Related Work 

Several experiences and instructional strategies have reported the use of portfolios to 
support  instructional  activities.  However,  most  of  them  involve  the  use  of  physical 
portfolios.  Advances  in  information  and  communication  technologies  have  allowed 
translating the  metaphor of physical portfolios to digital portfolios [11], [12]. Then, 
digital portfolios have been extended to virtual portfolios, allowing not only preparing 
and storing digital documents and records, but also supporting interaction among the 
actors of the instructional scenario [13]. These functionalities have an impact on the 
way that communities of practice carry out their activities. More and more groupware 
tools have been included in these portfolios in order to improve the flexibility of the 
work in these communities [16]. However, some key requirements such as the support 
for ad-hoc meetings are still pending. 

The use of these virtual portfolios has overcome the limit of educational scenarios. 
Currently, it is possible to see experiences of using these products in work scenarios 
such  as:  police  departments  [14],  K-12  educational  institutions  [15],  and  businesses 
[17], [18], [19]. 

Most of the available solutions implement virtual portfolios using centralized components 
[20]. However, distributed and ad-hoc access to the resources is required, for 
example,  during  a  trip  or  while  sitting  in  a  waiting  room,  in  order  to  provide  more 
flexibility for interactions. The next section presents the virtual environment that was 
designed to provide more flexibility to interactions among practicing students, tutors 
and supervisors in both educational centers and universities. 

4   Mobile Portfolio 

The implemented virtual space is the result of the reengineering process done to the 
online portfolio shown in Figure 2. Although the look and feel of the tool is the same, 
it has been completely redesigned in order to support synchronous and asynchronous 
work of practicing students and professors (tutors and supervisors). The portfolio has 
been  transformed  into  an  autonomous  and  mobile  entity  which  can  be  used  in  synchronous 
and asynchronous  work scenarios. The portfolio information  now has two 
master  copies  that  need  to  be  synchronized.  A  copy  is  stored  in  the  server  and  the 
other in the mobile computing devices used by the student/professor/tutor. The information 
of both portfolio copies can be copied or shared with any other portfolio of a 
community  member on-demand.  A student can  work offline on  his/her desktop PC, 
Laptop or Tablet PC and then, he/she can synchronize the updated information with 
the master copy stored in the server. The online portfolio becomes mobile. Although 

 

A Mobile Portfolio to Support Communities of Practice in Science Education 

421 

the information included in the portfolio can be in any digital format (e.g. PDF, gif, 
jpeg, .doc and .xls), each file has a XML descriptor that registers the metadata about 
the current version of the file and its cataloging information. These file descriptors are 
copied (as attached files) every time a copy of a portfolio resource is carried out. 

The mobile portfolio allows students to share its information with other peer computers 
(of students or professors) without intermediary servers. It allows students to 
carry the portfolio all the time and meet with peers and professors in any place (e.g. 
coffee shops, parks or any other physical place) and at any time. It does not matter if 
there  is  network  communication  support  or  not.  In  such  cases,  the  portfolio  implements 
a Mobile Ad-hoc NETwork (MANET).  

Fig. 3. Interaction scenario using the mobile portfolio 

 

Typically,  the  work  inside  the  university  can  be  done  in  a  synchronous  or  asynchronous 
way (Fig. 3). If the work is asynchronous, the XML descriptors are used to 
synchronize the portfolio information between the client and server. These descriptors 
can also be used to synchronize portfolio contents between two users. In case of synchronous 
 work,  an  updated  copy  of  the  portfolio  is  always  available  in  the  server. 
Professors can use his/her portfolio module to access all public resources stored in the 
server. 

When students are in the educational center doing practice activities they can use a 
local  copy  of  the  portfolio  to  record  experiences,  add/updates  to  the  documents  and 
conduct ad-hoc meetings with peers and professors (Fig. 3). The mobile portfolio implementation 
provides  more  flexibility  to the students’  work  mainly  when they are in 
scenarios without networking services. Provided that the portfolio is stored locally in the 
mobile devices, students and professors can be on the move as much as they need, and 
the resources will be available all the time. Provided that the mobile portfolio can store 
its resources into a mobile computing device (e.g. Laptop or TabletPC), the resources 
can be easily shared and distributed to other users, even if such users are not located in 
the same place or are working at the same time. These mobile portfolios can be used as 
intermediaries to support sharing information among users that are not co-located.  

422 

O. Herrera et al. 

Fig. 4. Services provided by the mobile portfolio 

 

The mobile portfolio implements five main services (Fig. 4): distributed operation, 
session  management,  data  sharing,  floor  control  management  and  on-demand  synchronization.
  The  distributed  operations  currently  implemented  are:  annotations 
(comments) in shared PDF and MS  word documents, presentations using PPT files. 
These  operations  require  synchronous  communication  among  the  users  involved  in 
the interaction process. 

The session management supports closed (private) and open sessions. They do not 
require the presence of a server. This functionality allows students and professors to 
carry out ad-hoc meetings almost anytime and anywhere. Each portfolio has a public 
and a private storage space.  The private space can be accessed by the owner of the 
portfolio only. Usually, it contains unconcluded work or preliminary ideas.  The public 
 storage  space  represents  the  official  portfolio.  It  includes  all  documents  that  are 
visible  to  other  users.  Functionalities  to  share  and  synchronize  these  documents  are 
part of the portfolio data sharing capabilities. 

Finally, the floor control functionalities allow users in a work session to follow a 
free  (i.e.  peer-to-peer)  or  master-slave  (i.e.  client-server)  interaction  protocol.  This 

 

A Mobile Portfolio to Support Communities of Practice in Science Education 

423 

functionality could be used, for example, to carry out a distributed presentation in an 
ad-hoc work meeting. 

This strategy of integrating coupled and uncoupled portfolios facilitates the interaction 
 among  members  of  a  community  of  practice.  Wenger  [2]  defined  three  main 
features  for  a  community  of  practice:  common  community  goals  (portfolio  goals), 
committed  community  members  and  a  shared  repertory  (public  storage  space).  The 
mobile  portfolio  supports  the  third  feature,  which  is  the  only  one  applicable  to  this 
product. 

The mobile portfolio was implemented by using C# and reusing part of the functionalities 
available in the .NET framework and the OneNote libraries. It included the 
use of COM components to implement shared objects attached to shared documents, 
such  as  comments  and  synchronous  data  delivery  (e.g.  distributed  presentations). 
Provided that the shared files are modified mainly by the authors, the data consistency 
of the public storage space follows the Unix semantic policy [21]. All functionalities 
of networking, data synchronization, and session management embedded in the mobile 
portfolio are the same as that implemented in the PASIR platform [22], [23]. 

The mobile portfolio has been tested in a simulated scenario at the University of 
Chile. Five persons (mobile users) from the Computer Science Department were involved 
in such tests. These activities wanted to identify capabilities and limitations of 
the  mobile  portfolio  when  it  is  isolated  (disconnected),  connected  to  a  MANET  or 
connected  to  an  infrastructure-based  wired/wireless  network.  The  obtained  results 
show  the  application  is  able  to  work  in  these  three  scenarios  with  an  acceptable  
performance.  The  application  functionalities  were  available  at  all  times  in  the  three 
scenarios. The data synchronization process worked well in client-server and peer-topeer 
connections. These results are not surprising. They can be explained because the 
new functionalities of the portfolio were implemented mainly by reusing tested components 
that are part of PASIR. Therefore, the real challenge for the mobile portfolio 
is to show that it is useful and usable by members of communities of practice to support 
their practice activities in science education.  

5   Conclusions and Future Work 

One of the most important activities carried out by educational science students during 
the instructional process are the practice activities. These activities are more enriching 
and attractive when they are conducted through a community of practice. The 
use of portfolios is a common practice to support students’ practice activities. These 
portfolios  can  be  physical  or  computer-supported.  The  first  ones  have  well-known 
limitations that have been discussed in the literature [11], [12]. The second ones are 
the evolution of the physical portfolios. The digital (or computer-supported) portfolios 
have  tried  to  overcome  the  limitations  of  the  previous  ones.  Unfortunately,  most  of 
these  digital  portfolios  involve  centralized  components  which  limit  its  applicability 
when no communication infrastructure or access to a server is available. 

This  paper  presents  a  mobile  portfolio  which  can  work  in  both  peer-to-peer  and 
client-server  scenarios.  The  services  provided  by  this  platform  allow  members  of  a 
community  of  practice  to  interact  almost  anytime  and  anyplace.  Provided  that  the 
mobile  portfolios  can  locally  store  the  resources  they  contain,  the  resources  can  be 

424 

O. Herrera et al. 

easily  shared  with  other  users,  even  if  users  are  not  working  at  the  same  time  and 
place. 

Currently,  the  implemented  application  is  stable,  but  no  formal  experimentations 
have  been  done  with  real  practicing  students  or  professors.  However,  several  tests 
have been performed by the developers in order to validate the flexibility, availability 
and  functionalities  provided  by  the  tool.  The  obtained  results  are  encouraging.  Although 
the system has shown good results during the tests (in terms of functionality 
and stability), its real contribution can only be defined by the final users. Therefore, 
the next step in this research work involves using the mobile portfolio to support real 
communities of practice in Educational Centers and Universities. 

Acknowledgments. This work was partially supported by Fondecyt (Chile), grant Nº: 
11060467 and by MECESUP (Chile) Project Nº: UCH0109. 

References 

1.  Dewey, J.: The School and Society. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois (1915) 
2.  Wenger, E.: Communities of practice: Learning, meaning and identity. Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge UK (1999) 

3.  Engeström, Y.: Learning by expanding. Orienta-Konsultit, Helsinki Finland (1987) 
4.  Vygotsky,  L.S.: Mind and Society: the Development of Higher Psychological Processes. 

Harvard University Press, Cambridge UK (1987) 

5.  Schon, D.A.: Educating the Reflective Practitioner: Toward  a New Design for  Teaching 

and Learning in the Professions. Jossey-Bass Publishers, San Francisco, CA (1987) 

6.  Inostroza,  G.:  The  practice:  the  engine  of  the  teachers’  instruction  (in  Spanish).  Olmen, 

Santiago de Chile (1999) 

7.  Betti, M., Mellado, M.E.: Using TICs in the initial instruction of teachers: the on-line portfolios 
and the communities of practice/learning (in Spanish). Pensamiento Educativo 35, 
311–330 (2004) 

8.  Chilean  Education  Ministry:  Standards  to Perform  the  Initial  Instruction  of  Teachers  (in 

Spanish). High Education Division, Santiago, Chile (2001) 

9.  Brown, A., Campione, J.: Psychological theory and the design of innovative learning environments.
 In: Schauble, L., Glaser, R. (eds.) Innovations in Learning: New Environments 
for Education, pp. 289–325. Lawrence Erlbaum, Mahwah (1996) 

10.  Herrera, O., Fuller, D.: Shared Knowledge: the Result of Negotiation in Non-Hierarchical 
Environments.  In:  Fuks,  H.,  Lukosch,  S.,  Salgado,  A.C.  (eds.)  CRIWG  2005  LNCS, 
vol. 3706, pp. 255–262. Springer, Heidelberg (2005) 

11.  Pardieck,  S.,  McMullen,  D.:  Development  of  a  Digital  Portfolio  System  for  Preservice 
Teachers. In: Proc. of the 17th World Conference on Educational Multimedia, Hypermedia 
and Telecommunications, Montreal, Canada, pp. 2306–2310 (2005)  

12.  Spendlove, D., Hopper, M.: Using ’electronic portfolios’ to challenge current orthodoxies 
in  the  presentation  of  an  initial  teacher  training  design  and  technology  activity.  International 
Journal of Technology and Design Education 16(2), 177–191 (2006) 

13.  Sorensen, E., Tolsby, H., Dirckinck-Holmfeld, L.: Virtual Portfolios for Collaboration in 
Distributed Web-Based Learning. In: Proc. of the 13th World Conference on Educational 
Multimedia, Hypermedia and Telecommunications, Denver, USA, pp. 1840–1845 (2002) 

 

A Mobile Portfolio to Support Communities of Practice in Science Education 

425 

14.  De Laat, M.: Network and Content Analysis in an Online Community Discourse. In: Proceedings 
of the 4th Computer Support for Collaborative Learning (CSCL), Boulder, Colorado,
 USA, pp. 625–626 (2002) 

15.  Stahl,  G.:  Groupware  goes  to  school.  In:  Haake,  J.M.,  Pino,  J.A.  (eds.)  CRIWG  2002 

LNCS, vol. 2440, pp. 7–24. Springer, Heidelberg (2002) 

16.  Suthers, D.: Supporting and Changing Practices of Multiple Communities. In: Proc. of the 
6th International Conference of the Learning Sciences, Los Angeles, California, USA, pp. 
537–544 (2004) 

17.  Choi, M.: Communities of practice: an alternative learning model for knowledge creation. 

British Journal of Educational Technology 37(1), 143–146 (2006) 

18.  Hildreth, P., Kimble, C., Wright, P.: Communities of Practice in the Distributed International 
Environment. The. Journal of Knowledge Management 4(1), 27–37 (2000) 

19.  Vasconcelos,  J.,  Castro,  P.,  Gens,  P.,  Kimble,  K.:  Knowledge  Management  in  NonGovernmental 
Organisations: A Partnership for the Future. In: Proceedings of the 7th International 
 Conference  on  Enterprise  Information  Systems  (ICEIS),  Miami,  USA,  pp.  
24–28 (2005) 

20.  Sorensen, E.K., Takle, E.S., Taber, M.R., Fils, D.: CSCL Structuring the Past, Present and 
Future through Virtual Portfolios. In: Dirckinck-Holmfeld, L., Fibiger, B. (eds.) Learning 
in Virtual Environments, Samfundslitteratur Press (2002) 

21.  Accetta,  M.,  Baron,  R.,  Bolosky,  W.,  Golub,  D.,  Rashid,  R.,  Tevanian,  A.,  Young,  M.: 
Mach: a new kernel foundation for UNIX development. In: Proc. of the USENIX Summer 
Conference, Altanta, GA, USA, pp. 93–113 (1986)  

22.  Neyem,  A.,  Ochoa,  S.F.,  Guerrero,  L.A.,  Pino,  J.A.:  Sharing  Information  Resources  in 
Mobile Ad-hoc Networks. In: Fuks, H., Lukosch, S., Salgado, A.C. (eds.) CRIWG 2005 
LNCS, vol. 3706, pp. 351–358. Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg (2005) 

23.  Neyem,  A.,  Ochoa,  S.F.,  Pino,  J.A.:  Supporting  Mobile  Collaboration  with  ServiceOriented 
 Mobile  Units.  In:  Dimitriadis,  Y.A.,  Zigurs,  I.,  Gómez-Sánchez,  E.  (eds.) 
Groupware:  Design,  Implementation,  and  Use.  Lecture  Notes  of  Computer  Science, 
vol. 4154, pp. 228–245. Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg (2006) 

