 

Collaboration for Learning Language Skills 

Luis A. Guerrero1, Milko Madariaga1, Cesar Collazos2, 

José A. Pino1, and Sergio Ochoa1 

1 Department of Computer Science, Universidad de Chile 

2 FIET, Universidad del Cauca, Colombia 

{luguerre, mmadaria, ccollazo, 

jpino, sochoa}@dcc.uchile.cl 

Abstract. A Collaborative activity is designed and a software tool is developed 
to  support  teaching  grammar  to  primary  education  students.  The  activity  is 
intended to create interdependencies among students. The software tool helps to 
implement  the  activity.  Activity  and  tool  were  designed  for  teaching  Spanish 
grammar, but they can be adapted for teaching other languages. 

1   Introduction 

Group  work  has  long  been  used  as  a  pedagogical  tool  in  a  variety  of  learning 
situations  and,  indeed,  according  to  Slavin  “many  studies  have  shown  that  two  or 
more  individuals  can  solve  problems  of  different  kinds  better  when  they  work  in  
groups than when they work independently” [16]. A specific type of group learning is 
that supported by collaborative techniques: Computer Supported Collaborative Work 
(CSCL).  Collaborative  learning  technologies  must  go  beyond  generic  groupware 
applications, and even the basic technology is not yet well developed [17]. 

CSCL can of course be applied to teach language skills.  Language  knowledge is 
considered  one  of  the  most  important  assets  for  a  person’s  life.  Thus,  language 
acquisition  courses  constitute  a  substantial  portion  of  the  primary  and  secondary 
curriculum in many countries. Our own University students still have deficiencies in 
writing abilities; despite the fact the acceptance selection tests include this subject in 
their evaluation. This situation is further aggravated by recent technology uses - such 
as textual chat through cellular phones - which do not motivate youngsters to apply 
good grammar for communication. 

Our purpose was to develop a tool to support teaching grammar to primary school 
students. It is assumed the tool will be used with Collaborative Learning techniques. 
Specifically, it can be applied to 6th, 7th or 8th grade Spanish grammar students, but it 
may be adapted to teach other languages grammar as well. 

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents related work. The design of 
the collaborative activity used as a basis for the tool is presented in Section 3. Section 
4  includes  the  main  features  of  the  tool.  Section  5  presents  some  practice  with  the 
system and finally, section 6 presents the conclusions and future work. 

H. Fuks, S. Lukosch, and A.C. Salgado (Eds.): CRIWG 2005, LNCS 3706, pp. 284 – 291, 2005. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005 

 

Collaboration for Learning Language Skills 

285 

2   Related Work 

Sánchez  [14]  has  developed  an  Internet  site  for  non-specialist  students  working  on 
Spanish  grammar,  designed  to  encourage  their  autonomy.  The  site  is  intended  as  a 
complement to regular classes and to the conventional tools. By offering a choice of 
learning paths, the designers seek to help students to acquire or to reinforce aspects of 
the declarative knowledge they need to perform language tasks during regular classes. 
E-Cid [19] is an online Spanish course replacing traditional lessons. This course is 

based on contrastive grammar, and has been designed in modular form. 

ELMA (Electronic Language Material Archive) [20] is a Web-searchable tool that 
can be used to customize syllabi according to content-based learning practices. This 
Web-based content will be accompanied by a battery of activities aimed at activating 
a  student's  previous  knowledge,  facilitating  the  student's  ability  to  organize 
information and develop interpretive skills, and at generating class discussion. 

Rodríguez  et  al.  have  designed  collaborative  learning  games  using  palmtops  for 
students  in  the  area  of  Spanish  language,  obtaining  high  levels  of  pupil  motivation, 
attention and concentration [11].  

Klein  has developed a Spanish class in a collaborative  manner  without computer 
support. In his course, Klein improves speaking and writing skills via extensive and 
intensive  practice  in  both  areas  [22].  Ying-Hong  et  al.  have  developed  an  English 
distance  learning  system  (English  multimedia  corpus).  It  includes  English  articles, 
dialogs and videos [18].  

Hardy  has  developed  a  Web  site  to  introduce  the  basic  syntactic  structure  of 
Modern English and the most common prescriptive rules in formal writing, containing 
thousands  of  exercises;  students  may  immediately  know  the  correctness  of  their 
answers [21]. 

The  University  of  Sydney  has  built  web  sites,  which  may  be  visited  to  learn 
English  grammar,  introducing  some  basic  concepts  in  English  grammar:  parts  of 
speech, groups and phrases and subject and predicate [23]. 

There  are  many  other  computer-supported  experiences  to  teach  Spanish  and 
English grammar. These cases focus on student group work, not collaborative groups: 
collaborative activities do not just happen when people are put together and required 
to  do  a  task  in  unison  [6].  A  supportive  social  milieu  and  a  task  infrastructure  are 
required. In this paper,  we  focus on collaboration as a  group phenomenon in  which 
complex tasks are managed through close, step-by-step, apparently casual monitoring 
by participants of each other’s actions, often cued through language. 

3   The Collaborative Activity 

The  decision  to  use  collaborative  learning  (CL)  arose  primarily  from  a  desire  to 
innovate  and  to  increase  student  participation.  A  cooperative  group  does  not 
automatically  improve  the  construction  of  high  order  cognitive  skills  and  complex 
knowledge structures. In order to increase the possibilities for mutual understanding 
and  task-related  social  interaction,  interaction  tools  are  needed  that  are  adequately 
related  both  to  the  new  concepts  to  be  learned  and  to  the  previous  experience  and 
knowledge  of  the  students  [9].  There  should  be  flexible  methods  available  for  the 

 

286 

L.A. Guerrero et al. 

students,  to  help  them  externalize  their  preliminary  ideas  and  make  their  thinking 
process transparent to others. From a constructivist perspective, CL can be viewed as 
one of the pedagogical methods that can stimulate students to negotiate information 
and to discuss complex problems from various perspectives. This can support learners 
to elaborate, explain and evaluate information in order to reand 
co-construct (new) 
knowledge  or  to  solve  problems  [3,  15]. That  is  our  rationale  to  design  a  teachinglearning 
activity based on collaborative learning techniques. 

The designed activity was based on modifying the Language and Communication 
curricula for 6-8th grades from our Ministry of Education [10]. The Ministry suggests 
a series of individual activities for grammar contents.  

The designed activity includes elements of CL [7]. In particular, the activity  was 
designed to generate interdependencies among group members, such as the need for 
information interchange during task performing, work splitting into several roles, and 
the need for explicit knowledge sharing [13]. These interdependencies are the key to 
collaboration, and it is not easy to achieve them. We based our work on Collazos et 
al.,  who have developed a mechanism to structure positive interdependence through 
software tools intended to make students think in terms of “we” instead of “me” [1]. 
When positive interdependence is clearly structured and understood, group members 
perceive that they – and their workare 
linked for mutual benefit, that the efforts of 
each  group  member  will  be  unique,  and  that  the  unique  efforts  of  all  members  will 
contribute to success. 

The activity has two roles: teacher and student. The teacher prepares the activity 
and acts as a facilitator. The students work in small groups. They must perform the 
tasks assigned by the teacher and solve any stated problems. The teacher must select a 
set of students to do the activity. The number of students should not exceed six, since 
several studies suggest small groups are best to generate maximum participation and 
idea  interchange  [2].  As  an  example,  the  activity  development  will  be  explained 
below for a group of four students. 

The teacher must choose content for the activity. The content for the example will 
be  a  morphological  analysis:  classify  each  word  from  a  text  to  belong  to  just  one 
category, according to context within its sentence. At the beginning, the teacher must 
select the work categories (for instance: nouns, adjectives, verbs, adverbs). 

The  teacher  must  then  find  suitable  work  texts.  The  number  of  texts  must  agree 
with the number of students who will participate in the activity. The teacher has also 
to find relevant reference material for the students and make it available to them. 

Planning of the activity is done as follows. In our example we have four students 
numbered S1-S4, and four texts labeled T1-T4. There are four work cycles; each of 
them  has  individual  work  and  then  group  work.  Both  work  types  are  instances  of 
Problem Based Learning (PBL) [5]. In PBL, the teacher assigns tasks to students, and 
they must do research and other actions to solve the problems by themselves. 

The individual activity consists of studying one morphological element for one of 
the texts during each cycle. The student must identify which words correspond to this 
morphological element in the text (Fig. 1). This activity involves a  kind of positive 
interdependence:  resource  interdependence,  allowing  students  to  share  materials, 
information  and  other  resources.  This  encourages  additional  conversation  and 
planning and gives elements to the teacher to monitor the activity. 

 

 

Text 

Element 

Collaboration for Learning Language Skills 

287 

Ti 

Ti+1(mod 4) 

Ti+2(mod 4)

Ti+3(mod 4) 

 Noun 

 Verb 

 Adjective

 Adverb

Fig. 1. Assignments for Student Si 

 

The student must do work in two aspects: 
1. Learn  about  the  theory  concerning  the  grammatical  element  under  study.  The 
student  may  or  may  not  have  previous  knowledge.  S/he  may  use  the  reference 
material, ask his colleagues or consult other information sources. 

2. Apply  the  theory  to  identify  words  being  the  grammatical  element  in  the  text, 

according to their context. 
The student tries to find all words belonging to his category in this individual work 
phase. Three cases may occur: i) s/he rightly chose words belonging to the category; 
ii)  s/he  made  a  wrong  choice  when  selecting  words  which  do  not  belong  to  the 
category; and iii) s/he omitted to choose words belonging to the category. The teacher 
uses the whole of these cases to determine the student’s strengths and weaknesses and 
to evaluate his/her performance. Note this problem solving involves an understanding 
of the grammatical elements; it is not an automatic task. 

After  the  individual  work,  the  students  must  do  group  work.  It  consists  of  colocated 
 correction  and  discussion  of  the  previous  activity.  The  students  must  have 
access to the performance as a group they have obtained thus far. This group activity 
is very important. When an individual member of the group expresses his/her opinion 
in relation to the shared public understanding of the group, this will be an attempt to 
synchronize  his/her  own  understanding  with  the  group-accepted  version  and  make 
clear  the  disagreements  if  there  are  any.  Depending  on  the  outcome  of  this  process 
there may be further interaction and negotiation until a new meaning or understanding 
is  fully  accepted  by  the  group.  The  key  aspects  of  co-construction  of  knowledge, 
meaning and understanding lie on this process interaction among individuals, as well 
as on their shared and individual cognition. 

The  group  activity  ends  when  the  group  passes  a  threshold  of  performance,  e.g., 
suppose  students  S1  and  S2  chose  a  certain  word  as  noun  (correct)  and  adjective 
(incorrect) at the same time. If individual performances were to be considered, there 
will  be  a  right  classification  (favourable  points)  and  an  incorrect  one  (no  points 
counted). On the other hand, the group numerical performance would be null, because 
it is incorrect to classify the word both as noun and adjective for that sentence. 

The students will have to justify their choices during this group activity, generating 
discussion. According to Doise and Mugny, the benefits of collaborative learning are 
explained by the fact that two individuals will disagree at some point, that they will 
feel a social pressure to solve that conflict, and that the resolution of this conflict may 
lead one or both of them to change their viewpoint [4]. The social pressure in this case 
is done by group members wishing to improve the group performance. 

 

288 

L.A. Guerrero et al. 

The teacher makes the evaluation to determine whether or not the group has passed 
the  performance  threshold.  In  case  the  group  does  not  approve,  the  students  must 
continue  discussing  changes  to  word  classifications.  If  they  pass,  each  student  has 
probably mastered his grammatical element and learned something on the other ones. 
A new cycle is then started with each student in charge of a different element from 
the one s/he worked in the previous cycle (Fig. 1). This strategy lets each student deal 
with  all  concepts  of  the  activity  contents.  The  strategy  is  consistent  with 
recommendations  from  standard  CL  literature:  Johnson  et  al.,  e.g.,  recommend 
rotating roles while the activity be in development [8]. The number of cycles and the 
number of different texts, then, must agree with the number of students. The teacher 
can  control  the  difficulty  of  the  text  for  each  cycle;  s/he  will  probably  increase  it 
depending  on  the  previous  rate  of  improvement  and  to  keep  students’  interest.  It  is 
also expected the students will increasingly move from consulting reference material 
to asking colleagues who have already mastered concepts. 

4   The Computer Tool 

There are three types of tool users: teachers, students and a system administrator. A 
teacher  can  create  and  monitor  activities,  input  texts,  input  grammatical  categories, 
input  reference  material  and  register  students.  A  student  can  read  the  activity 
description  and  is  allowed  to  do  individual  and  group  tasks.  The  administrator 
maintains activities and users for the system. 

The base work unit is the activity. It has name, description, students assigned to it, 
a  specific  grammatical  category  and  a  text.  Automatic  correction  of  students’ 
classifications is provided if the teacher has done the classification beforehand. Please 
note  this  does  not  mean  the  activity  to  be  done  by  the  students  is  going  to  be 
mechanical or without reasoning. 

Fig. 2. Individual work UI 

 

 

 

Collaboration for Learning Language Skills 

289 

Monitoring  is  provided  through  statistical  reports  showing  individual  and  group 
performance in terms of number of rightly, incorrectly classified and omitted words. 
The screen also identifies the problematic words. This information, after each cycle, 
lets the teacher support students by providing hints or suggesting changes. 

Each student gets a personalized screen, describing his/her activities. Fig. 2 shows 
the  screen  for  individual  work,  which  may  be  asynchronous  and  distributed.  Group 
work, by contrast, requires face-to-face, synchronous work in just one computer. 

Color cues are provided in the screens for easy visualization. Thus, the screen for 
group work presents all words classified by a specific student with the same color. A 
distinctive color is used for conflicting words, i.e., those ones chosen by two or more 
students.  The  current  group  performance  is  also  presented  in  graphic  form.  Finally, 
the positive or negative difference with respect to the threshold is also shown. 

Both individual and group work user interfaces have a quick access button to the 

reference material. Therefore, they can easily review relevant theory. 

5   Experimenting with the System 

A preliminary experimentation was done with 32 seventh grade students (12-13 years 
old) at a public school in our country, divided in eight  groups of  four students. We 
would have liked to assess whether a collaborative activity such as the proposed one 
actually  makes  students  learn  the  subject.  Furthermore,  we  should  compare  this 
activity  to  traditional  ones  to  determine  the  value  of  the  collaborative  approach. 
However, our research is still on-going, and thus, a first pre-experiment was intended 
just to have a first input about the usability of the tool. 

The experiment consisted of two sessions with a questionnaire at the end of each of 
them. Some improvements to the usability of the software were done between the first 
and  second  session,  according  to  the  comments  of  the  students.  Some  of  the 
improvements were: use of standards in colours and icons, a simplified way to enter 
the  application  (avoiding  the  use  of  login  and  passwords),  use  of  nicknames,  more 
graphical information (instead text-only interfaces), use of a more simplified language 
(in  the  directions  and  messages),  the  possibility  to  change  the  student  data  (the 
nickname, the colours), a simplified way to manage the software security (login and 
passwords are very complicated concepts). 

Table 1. Second questionnaire results 

Question 

activity 

language 

improved  my  Spanish 

The 
knowledge 
The group work improved my personal knowledge 
We finished the activity in a successful way 
I like the group work activity 
Four people were a good group size 
I contribute to my group knowledge 
I liked the activity 
I liked the software tool 

Likert 
average 

3.8 

3.6 
4.0 
3.8 
3.5 
4.3 
3.8 
4.1 

Disagree 
(1 & 2) 
13.3% 

Neutral 

(3) 

13.3% 

Agree 
(4 & 5) 
73.3% 

20.0% 
6.7% 
6.7% 
13.3% 
3.3% 
6.7% 
6.7% 

16.7% 
16.7% 
33.3% 
33.3% 
16.7% 
30.0% 
23.3% 

63.3% 
76.6% 
60.0% 
53.3% 
80.0% 
63.3% 
70.0% 

 

290 

L.A. Guerrero et al. 

Table  1  presents  some  of  the  results  of  the  second  anonymous  questionnaire. 
Answers to the questions were in a Likert 5-value scale (5-totally agree; 4-agree; 3neutral;
  2-disagree;  1-totally  disagree).  Most  interesting  results  were  the  following 
ones:  over  70%  of  the  students  think  the  activity  improved  their  Spanish  language 
knowledge;  60%  of  the  students  also  liked  group  work,  and  most  of  the  rest  were 
neutral about group work. Only two students (6.6%) did not like the activity. 

6   Conclusions and Future Work 

Collaboration  is  not  simply  a  treatment  with  positive  effects  on  participants. 
Collaboration  is  a  social  structure  in  which  two  or  more  people  interact  with  each 
other and, in some circumstances, some types of interaction occur having a positive 
effect  [12].  Activities  should  then  be  designed  accordingly  to  get  a  shared 
understanding of the problematic situation. 

Our basic assumption is that CSCL tools must be associated to CL techniques to be 
truly  considered  “collaborative”;  otherwise  it  may  be  just  “group”  or  “collective” 
learning. The chosen technique in our case was PBL: the activity begins as a task the 
students  must  achieve.  It  is  while  trying  to  do  the  assignment  when  students  need 
background theory and concepts. Of course, most of the required information is easily 
available from the reference material, but it is while trying to assimilate it when that 
information is transformed into useful knowledge. Note that some PBL characteristics 
such as freedom to decide the methods or plan development, do not apply here. 

The  developed  activity  attempts  to  generate  a  CL  environment,  where  individual 
experimentation  and  group  collaboration  play  a  key  role  in  the  teaching/learning  of 
grammatical  concepts.  The  software,  on  the  other  hand,  is  intended  to  simplify  the 
teacher’s  task  in  terms  of  activity  creation  and  monitoring:  the  tool  automatically 
corrects  students’  assignments  and  it  also  provides  statistical  reports  on  students’ 
performance both currently and in its evolution in time. Despite the fact the developed 
activity  was  designed  to  support  teaching  of  Spanish  grammar,  we  think  it  can  be 
easily adapted to the grammatical elements of other languages. 

Finally,  it  is  possible  to  consider  the  use  of  some  alternative  development  and 
implementation  platforms,  which  could  provide  additional  flexibility  to  the  tool. 
Specifically,  we  could  include  wireless  mobile  devices  as  PDAs  (Personal  Digital 
Assistants). Naturally, the impact of this technology on the design of the application 
must be evaluated. The evaluation must include both the technical feasibility and the 
pedagogical  and  psychological  aspects  modelled  in  the  collaborative  tool.  Our  first 
impression  is  that  both  individual  and  group  tasks  can  be  supported  with  these 
devices. Individual tasks can be made in an asynchronous distributed way and thus, it 
should  be  easy  to  support  them.  The  synchronous  face-to-face  group  activity  could 
also be supported in its discussion with PDAs. 

Acknowledgements 

This  work  was  partially  supported  by  Fondecyt  (Chile)  grants  No.  1030959  and 
1040952. 

 

 

Collaboration for Learning Language Skills 

291 

References 

1.  Collazos, C., Guerrero, L., Pino, J., Ochoa, S.: Collaborative Scenarios to Promote Positive 

Interdependence among Group Members.  LNCS 2806, 2003, 356-370 

2.  Cooper, J.: Small-group Instruction in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology 
(SMET) Disciplines: A Status Report and an Agenda for the Future. Cooperative Learning 
and College Teaching Newsletter 6 (2), 1996 

3.  Dillenbourg,  P.,  Baker,  M.,  Blake,  A.,  O’Malley,  C.:  The  Evolution  of  Research  on 
Collaborative  Learning.  In  Spada,  H.  and  Reimann,  P.  (eds),  Learning  in  Humans  and 
Machines, 1995 

4.  Doise, W., Mugny, G.: The Social Development of the Intellect. Oxford: Pergamon Press, 

1984 

5.  Duch, B., Gron, S., Allen, D.: The Power of Problem-Based Learning, A Practical “How 

To” for Teaching Undergraduate Courses in Any Discipline, Stylus Pub. LLC (2001) 

6.  Galleger,  J.,  Kraut,  R.,  Egido,  C.:  Intellectual  Teamwork:  Social  Foundations  of 

Cooperative Work. Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1990 

7.  Johnson D., Johnson, R., Holubec, E.: Circles of learning (4th ed.). Edina, MN: Interaction 

Book Company, 1993 

8.  Johnson  D.,  Johnson  R,  Holubec,  E.:  Cooperation  in  the  Classroom.  Interaction  Book 

Company, Edina, MN, 1998 

9.  Katz,  S.,  Lesgold,  A.:  Collaborative  Problem-Solving  and  Reflection  in  Sherlock  II. 

Workshop on Collaborative Problem Solving, Edinburgh, 1993 

10.  Ministry of Education [our country]. Curriculum on Language and Communication for 68th 
grades, 2003 (in Spanish) 

11.  Rodríguez P, Nussbaum M, Zurita G, Rosas R Lagos F.: Personal Digital Assistants in the 

Classroom: An Experience. Ed-Media, Tampere, Finland, 2001 

12.  Roschelle,  J.,  Teasley,  S.:  The  Construction  of  Shared  Knowledge  in  Collaborative 
Problem-solving.  In  C.E.  O’Malley  (Ed),  Computer  Supported  Collaborative  Learning, 
Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1995, 69-197 

13.  Salomon,  G.:  What  does  the design  of  effective  CSCL  require  and how  do  we  study  its 

effects? SIGCUE Outlook, Special Issue on CSCL 21(3), 1992, 62-68 

14.  Sánchez,  P.:  Intégration  d’un  outil  informatique  dans  l’enseignement  du  niveau 
intermédiaire d’espagnol à l’Université de Technologie de Compiègne, Apprentissage des 
Langues et Systèmes d’Information et de Communication, 5(2), 2002, 209-229 

15.  Scardamalia,  M.,  Bereiter,  C.:  Computer  Support  for  Knowledge-building  Communities. 

Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3(3), 1994, 265-283 

16.  Slavin, R.: Using Student Team Learning. Baltimore, MD: Center for Social Organization 

of Schools, Johns Hopkins University, 1980 

17.  Stahl, G.: Groupware Goes to School. Lecture Notes in Computer Science 2440, 2002, 1-24 
18.  Ying-Hong,  W.,  Chih-Hao,  L.:  A  Multimedia  Database  Supports  English  Distance 
Learning,  Information  Sciences,  Informatics  and  Computer  Science:  An  International 
Journal, 158(1), 2004, 189-208 
19.  http://virtualcampus.ch/E-Cid 
20.  http://www.uctltc.org/funding/2000.01/elma.htm 
21.  http://textant.colostate.edu/grammarbook/title.html 
22.  http://www.uiowa.edu/~spanport/personal/Klein/w116/116-Hm.htm 
23.  http://www.arts.usyd.edu.au/departs/english/grammar/default.html 

 

