 

Sharing Information Resources in Mobile  

Ad-hoc Networks 

Andrés Neyem, Sergio F. Ochoa, José A. Pino, 

and Luis A. Guerrero 

Department of Computer Science, Universidad de Chile 

Blanco Encalada 2120, Santiago, Chile 

{aneyem, sochoa, jpino, luguerre}@dcc.uchile.cl  

Abstract. Many people are sharing digital resources through networks in order 
to facilitate, enhance or improve collaborative work. Information sharing is not 
only important to support collaborative work but it also represents the basis for 
design and implementation of solutions for typical design aspects of groupware 
applications,  such  as:  floor  control,  group  memory,  shared  objects  replication 
and  sessions  and  users  management.  Advances  in  mobile  technology  have 
extended  the  sharing  information  scenarios  to  Mobile  Ad-hoc  Networks 
(MANETs),  which  has  brought  new  challenges.  This  paper  presents  a  simple 
service platform to share information resources among members of a MANETsupported 
 groupware  session.  People  interact  using  notebooks  and  PDAs.  In 
addition,  a  shared  presentation  tool  which  has  been  developed  using  the 
services of the platform is described. This presentation tool can be used to assist 
other  collaborative  activities,  such  as: 
technical  presentations,  casual 
interactions, meetings for decision making and software technical reviews. 

1   Introduction 

Gartner's report estimated that PDA revenues in 2004 reached a record $4.3 billion for 
a 16.7 percent increase, compared to 2003 figures [2]. IDC estimate that 13 million 
handheld devices are sold each year and the estimation for 2005 is 71 million units to 
be  sold  [8].  Advances  in  mobile  technology  and  the  price  reduction  of  computing 
mobile devices have prompted the spread of this technology to many scenarios, such 
as: schools, hospitals, police, government and business. However, handheld machines 
are  not  massively  used    to  assist  group  work  yet;  their  main  use  still  is  to  support 
personal activities.  

These devices incorporate communication capabilities - usually based on Wi-Fi - 
which  allow  them  to  interact  with  each  other  using  wireless  (one  hop)  and  mobile 
(multihop)  networks  [17].  Therefore,  any  physical  scenario  providing 
these 
communication  services  to  people  on  the  move  becomes  a  potential  collaboration 
arena.  Examples  of  these  scenarios  are:  shopping  malls,  offices,  universities,  hotels 
and  airports.  Software  reviews,  brainstorming  sessions,  shared  presentations  and 
synchronous learning activities are some of the collaboration activities that could be 
supported using these devices. However, supporting these  collaboration activities in 

H. Fuks, S. Lukosch, and A.C. Salgado (Eds.): CRIWG 2005, LNCS 3706, pp. 351 – 358, 2005. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005 

352 

A. Neyem et al. 

mobile  networks,  also  named  MANETs  (Mobile  Ad-hoc  NETworks)  [17],  involves 
finding MANET-based data sharing solutions.  

This paper presents a service platform that allows collaborators be grouped in adhoc 
sessions and share information resources on MANETs, by using  notebooks and 
PDAs. That platform can also be considered as a basis to develop solutions to support  
groupware  design  aspects,  such  as  floor  control,  group  memory,  shared  objects 
replication  and  sessions  and  users  management.  Solutions  found  to  support  these 
design aspects will depend on the MANETs information sharing strategy.  

Next section describes the challenges to share information on MANETs. Section 3 
presents related research  work. Section 4 describes the  service Platform  for  Ad-hoc 
Sharing  Information  Resources  (PASIR),  a  presentation  tool  which  has  been 
developed  using  the  services  of  the  platform,  and  a  discussion  on  PASIR  strengths 
and weaknesses. Finally, Section 5 presents the conclusions and future work. 

2   Sharing Information in MANETs 

For many years the CSCW and CSCL communities have used shared information as a 
way to support or enhance collaboration among people [14, 15]. Shared information 
has  also  being  used  to  develop  software  solutions  supporting  design  aspects  of 
groupware  applications  [4,  13].  The  most  common  strategy  to  share  information 
among  collaborators  involves  centralizing  data  and  services.  Many  groupware 
platforms were designed following this strategy [12], and they show good results in 
distributed systems supported by stable wired and wireless networks. However, this 
strategy is useless when collaborators are communicated through an unstable network 
like  a  MANET  [1,  5].  The  network  structure  becomes  highly  dynamic  since 
collaborators  move  continuously,  and  each  centralized  resource  represents  a  failure 
point for collaborative solutions in term of ensuring the communication availability. 
Hence, low availability of the shared data space jeopardizes the collaboration process. 
Although sharing information on mobile systems is not a new challenge, most of the 
proposals do not consider the use of handheld devices, such as PDAs, and unstable 
communication  services,  which 
is  a  particular  feature  of  MANETs.  These 
particularities bring new challenges for sharing information for collaboration. 

PDAs  typically  constrain  groupware  applications  mainly  in  terms  of  screen  size, 
processing  power,  memory  capacity  and  networking  services  provided  by  the 
operating  systems.  These  services  allow  notebooks  and  PDAs  be  integrated  in  the 
same workgroup scenario [5]. On the other hand, the signal instability and the tight 
bandwidth 
the  groupware 
communication  services  design.  Collaborative  systems  using  such  communication 
services  should  exhibit  high  shared  data  availability  to  avoid  jeopardizing  the 
collaborative process. These restraints also show  the need  for new  solutions able to 
keep high availability of shared information even in that unstable scenario.  

the  main  restrictions  for 

in  MANETs  represent 

3   Related Work 

There  are  several  research  initiatives  that  are  trying  to  provide  good  solutions  to 
support sharing information in peer-to-peer networks. Some of these related works are 

 

 

Sharing Information Resources in Mobile Ad-hoc Networks 

353 

tuple-based distributed systems derived from LINDA [3], such as: FT-LINDA, JINI, 
PLinda,  T-spaces,  Lime  and  JavaSpaces  [6,  11].  Although  these  implementations 
allow sharing information in peer-to-peer networks, they use centralized components 
to  provide  binding  among  components  of  the  distributed  system.  Such  centralized 
components become critical failure points in unstable networks.  

Another related project is the iClouds framework which offers spontaneous mobile 
user  interaction  and  file  exchange  in  mobile  ad-hoc  networks  [7].  This  framework 
does  not  require  centralized  components  because  it  does  a  full  replication  of  any 
shared file, which is appropriate in MANET scenarios. However, it does not provide 
support  to  exchange  shared  objects,  just  files.  In  addition,  iClouds  does  not 
distinguish among copies of a same shared file (e.g. master and slave copies) and does 
not support distributed operations on those files either. Similarly, the Proem platform 
provides support for shared files, but on Personal Area Networks [9]. 

Another interesting platform is XMIDDLE. It allows mobile hosts to share XML 
documents across heterogeneous mobile hosts, permitting on-line and off-line access 
to  data  [10].  However,  these  capabilities  do  not  allow  manipulating  compound 
documents (like MS-Office documents or Adobe Acrobat documents), which are used 
by many people to support the collaboration activities.  

Next  section  presents  a  software  platform  named  PASIR  (Platform  for  Ad-hoc 
Sharing  Information  Resources),  which  was  designed  to  share  files  and  compound 
documents using the functionality provided by the .NET framework. It allows users to 
share information resources through a distributed data space. 

4   PASIR 

The  proposed  platform  is  implemented  using  C#  programming  language  and  reuses 
the services provided by the .Net framework for object and file manipulation, and also 
for  networking.  There  are  no  centralized  services  or  data  in  the  platform.  Every 
component of PASIR is fully replicated in order to keep high availability of resources 
even when a session member gets isolated. Although a groupware system supported 
by  PASIR  is  composed  of  three  layers  (Fig.  1),  the  proposed  platform  involves  the 
two lower layers. 

Ad-hoc           
Groupware System 

Commercial 
Applications  

Distributed Operations, Sessions 
Management, Shared Resources 

Management, Floor Control Management

Communication and Sharing Information 

Resources  

Layer 3: Groupware  
                Applications 

Layer 2: Coordination 

Layer 1: Data Communication 

and Sharing 

 

Fig. 1. Architecture of a PASIR-supported Groupware System 

 

354 

A. Neyem et al. 

Each  layer  carries  out  a  specific  function  and  it  communicates  with  the  adjacent 
layers through a well-defined interface. The lower layer is in charge of providing all 
the  networking  and  data  sharing  services  among  the  groupware  applications.  The 
coordination  layer  uses  the  services  of  the  lower  layer  to  implement  the  typical 
groupware  services  for  collaborative  applications.  It  coordinates  distributed 
operations  and  it  generates  a  consistent  vision  of  the  group  activities.  The  services 
currently  implemented  in  this  layer  correspond  to  the  services  required  by  the 
prototype  application  used  to  test  the  platform.  They  include  session  and  user 
management,  floor  control  and  shared  objects  synchronization.  Nevertheless,  many 
other services for groupware applications can be included in this layer.  

Finally, services for data sharing provided by PASIR can be embedded in ad-hoc 
collaborative  applications  and  also  in  some  commercial  software  products,  such  as 
Microsoft Office, Adobe Acrobat and Photoshop. This particular functionality allows 
some  monolithic  applications  support  collaborative  activities.  Thus,  it  is  possible  to 
reuse  all  data-manipulation  applications  functionality  if  the  data  is  based  on  COM 
(Component Object Model) objects [16]. These applications represent the upper level 
of  the  architecture.  The  current  implementation  of  PASIR  supports  just  on-demand 
shared objects synchronization through services provided by the coordination layer. 

4.1   Data Communication and Sharing Layer 

The  PASIR  communication  services  are  asynchronous  and  based  on  UDP  over  IP. 
UDP  does  not  guarantee packet  delivery  as  TCP;  however,  it  is  suitable  for  mobile 
environments because it is connectionless. In addition, it allows using IP multicast to 
detect the presence of reachable hosts. Communication services provided by PASIR 
can  be  used  on  any  network  platform  able  to  use  UDP  over  IP,  such  as  Bluetooth, 
IrDA  and  IEEE  802.11x.  Consequently,  PASIR  can  be  used  in  stable  and  unstable 
communication environments. These communication services are the same provided 
by  the  .Net  framework  for  both  notebooks  and  PDAs.  Yet,  the  semantics  of  the 
messages was specifically designed to allow information sharing on MANETs.  

People are able to share two types of resources using the communication services: 
flat files and COM objects. Every shared resource has an XML descriptor specifying 
its  features  and  indicating  whether  the  resource  is  a  master  or  slave  copy.  These 
shared resources are located in a folder that every user has for each opened session. 
Some  shared  resources  could  be  a  collection  of  shared  interrelated  objects  (e.g,  a 
MSWord  document  or  a  PowerPoint  presentation  can  be  considered  a  collection  of 
shared  linked  COM  objects).  Besides,  the  comments  a  user  can  include  in  that 
collection are also shared objects that are part of the collection. These shared objects 
can  travel  together  or  they  can  be  filtered  to  decouple  them  for  synchronization 
purposes. The synchronization services are provided by the coordination layer. 

4.2   Coordination Layer 

The  coordination  layer  is  based  on  a  fully  replicated  session  manager.  It  locally 
records  information  about  users,  sessions  and  shared  resources  (Fig.  2),  and  allows 
users to interact with the shared objects through a visual interface (Fig. 3a and 3b). 
Shared  objects  are  grouped  in  sessions.  Every  session  also  groups  users  sharing  
 

 

 

Sharing Information Resources in Mobile Ad-hoc Networks 

355 

AdhocSessions

1 

0..*

AdhocSession 
-SessionId: string 
-Name: string 
-Type: string 

1 

1 

1..*

0..*

AdhocUser
-Name: string 
-IPHost: string 

AdhocUserShareResources

1

0..*

AdhocShareResource 

-Name: string 
-Description: string 
-Size: long 
-Type: string 
-Atributes: string 
-DateCreated: DateTime 
-DateModified: DateTime 

 

Fig. 2. Structure of the PASIR Session Manager 

                  (a) 

 

  

 

 

               (b) 

 

Fig. 3. User Interface of the PASIR Session Manager 

information  resources  with  the  remaining  session  members.  Every  user  in  the 
MANET can be part of more than one session. Users showing interest to connect to 
the  MANET  are  registered  by  the  AdhocSessions  class  (Fig.  2)  and  they  become 
available in the shared environment (Fig. 3a). 

Once inside the environment, a user (AdhocUser class) can access a session in two 
ways (Fig. 3b): (a) creating a session, in that case she is automatically inside; or (b) 
requesting access to an existing session (AdhocSession class). When a user creates a 
session  the  platform  gives  her  a  SessionId  which  is  not  visible  to  the  rest  of  the 
MANET members. The SessionId should be sent to the users that are invited to the 
session. The invitation and the SessionId will be delivered using multicast.  

Once  a  user  has  access  to  a  session,  a  local  shared  folder  of  the  session 
(AdhocShareResource class) becomes visible to the rest of the session members (Fig. 
3b).  Thus,  that  user  can  synchronize  her  shared  resources  with  the  resources  of  a 
specific partner or with the rest of the session members. The attributes of each shared 
object are analyzed and compared in order to carry out the synchronization process. 

 

356 

A. Neyem et al. 

However,  the  synchronization  of  files  that  are  not  composed  of  COM  objects  (e.g., 
plain text documents) is done using an XML descriptor of the files as support.  

Remote shared resources can be downloaded or remotely accessed using the local 
session  manager.  When  a  user  leaves  a  session,  the  local  shared  resources  are  kept 
available for the local user who can work asynchronously. The COM objects included 
by  the  user  in  the  local  copy  (e.g.,  comments  on  a  MSWord  document)  can  be 
transferred to the master copy  next time the user  with the master copy and the user 
with the comments are reconnected to the working session. Every working session is 
potentially alive even if no users are currently connected and it gets available when 
the  first  user  gets  in.  A  user  can  leave  a  working  session  for  good  indicating  that 
decision to the local session manager. A session is potentially alive while a registered 
user exists (even if he is not connected). 

4.3   Groupware Applications Layer 

Several groupware applications can be developed using PASIR services. Even some 
commercial products are able to interact with the platform using the services. As an 
example, this section briefly describes the design of SPT (Shared Presentation Tool). 
This tool makes shared PowerPoint documents accessible to several users in a session. 
Such users are also able to link comments to this shared document. This process can 
occur  both  when  the  document  is  being  edited  and  when  the  presentation  is  being 
delivered.  Author  and  presenter  use  the  regular  MS  PowerPoint  product,  whereas 
reviewers  connected  to  the  same  session  use  the  commenter  module  to  make 
comments.  Every  comment  is  linked  to  a  slide.  Comments  made  by  reviewers  are 
linked on-demand into the master copy of the PowerPoint document, that is the one 
used  by  the  presenter.  The  synchronization  process  can  be  done  following  four 
strategies: one sender and one receiver, one sender and many receivers, many senders 
and  one  receiver,  and  many  senders  and  many  receivers  (whole  synchronization). 
Every comment can be a COM object or an attribute specified in the XML descriptor 
depending on the .Net framework version being used (full or compact version). These 
comments  can  be  anonymous  or  not.  Moreover,  the  same  strategy  can  be  used  to 
make comments or corrections to a paragraph of a shared MS Word document. This 
tool  can  be  useful  to  support  collaborative  activities  such  as  software  technical 
reviews,  paper  presentations  or  meetings  for  decision  making.  This  implementation 
has the same user interface for notebooks and PDAs. 

4.4   Discussion 

The PASIR platform is easy to deploy in notebooks and PDAs communicated through 
a MANET. It allows sharing the information resources and keeps a high availability 
of  both  shared  information  resources  and  services.  That  functionality  can  be 
considered a basis to develop solutions to support the groupware design aspects and 
also  collaboration  among  people.  The  PASIR  current  implementation  supports 
distributed  asynchronous  work  because  of  the  services  currently  available  in  the 
coordination layer. Nevertheless, prototypes of synchronous coordination services are 
under construction.  

 

 

Sharing Information Resources in Mobile Ad-hoc Networks 

357 

The  relationship  between  PASIR  and  commercial  frameworks  and  applications 
allow  developers  reuse  functionalities  from  these  commercial  products  to  support 
collaborative activities or to create new groupware applications. Although this reuse 
constrains groupware systems, usually it also represents a reduction in development 
effort and an improvement on the product quality.  

The  main  limitation  of  this  proposal  refers  to  the  fact  these  advantages  can  be 
obtained only by using the MS Windows family of operating systems. Furthermore, 
the  integration  of  PDAs  and  notebooks  and  the  synchronization  mechanisms  also 
depend on it, because most of them are provided by the .Net framework.  

The  proposed  platform  can  also  be  used 

in  stable  (wireless  or  wired) 
communication  settings,  using  several  computing  devices  and  desktop  PCs.  The 
platform  functionality  in  that  case  is  the  same.  However,  the  stability  of  the 
communication  services  allows  including  the  server  in  the  network  to  ease  and  to 
improve the efficiency of the information sharing process.  

5   Conclusions and Future Work 

A  platform  easing  information  resource  sharing  in  MANETs  using  notebooks  and 
PDAs  has  been  presented.  The  platform  functionality  can  be  considered  a  basis  to 
develop  solutions  to  support  the  groupware  design  aspects  and  also  collaboration 
among people. Unlike other initiatives, the proposed platform takes advantage of the 
relationship  between  .Net  and  COM  frameworks  [16]  and  well-known  commercial 
products in order to provide a scenario to assist collaborative activities.  

The  main  advantage  of  PASIR  is  the  relationship  it  has  with  commercial 
frameworks and applications. It allows developers to reuse functionality available in 
these  frameworks  and  also  in  the  applications.  However,  these  advantages  are  only 
available  for  the  MS  Windows  family.  It  restricts  the  portability  of  the  groupware 
systems and programming languages that can be used to develop, extend or integrate 
these systems. Although PASIR was designed for MANETs, it is also possible to use 
it in stable communication settings including desktop PCs. 

In  order  to  complete  the  PASIR  support  for  synchronous  and  asynchronous 
information sharing, the authors are currently working on the implementation of new 
coordination  services  that  will  allow  synchronous  sharing  of  the  COM  objects  and 
files.  Future  work  includes  embedding  awareness  components  in  monolithic 
commercial  applications,  using  add-in  capabilities  to  improve  the  support  for  the 
collaborative  work.  Moreover,  the  groupware  services  provided  by  the  coordination 
layer  will  be  increased  and  improved.  Finally,  experimentation  in  real  scenarios 
should be carried out to evaluate the proposal and get feedback to improve it. 

Acknowledgments 

This  work  was  partially  supported  by  Fondecyt  (Chile),  grants  Nº:  1030959  and 
1040952 and by MECESUP (Chile) Project Nº: UCH0109. 

 

358 

A. Neyem et al. 

References 

1.  Aldunate, R., Ochoa, S., Peña-Mora, F., Nussbaum, M. Robust Mobile Ad-hoc Space for 
Collaboration to Support Disaster Relief Efforts Involving Critical Physical Infrastructure. 
ASCE Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering. In press. 

2.  Gartner,  Inc.  Gartner  Says  Worldwide  PDA  Shipments  Grew  7  Percent  While  Revenue 
Increased  17  Percent  in  2004.  (2005).  URL:  www.gartner.com/press_releases/asset_ 
120374_11.html 

3.  Gelernter, D.: Generative Communication in Linda. ACM Transactions on Programming 

Languages and Systems 7(1), (1985), 80-112. 

4.  Guerrero,  L.,  Fuller,  D.  A  Pattern  System  for  the  Development  of  Collaborative 

Applications. Information and Software Technology 43(7), (2001), 457-467. 

5.  Guerrero,  L.,  Ochoa,  S.,  Pino,  J.,  Collazos,  C.  Favorable  Cases  for  the  Use  of  PDAs  in 
Collaborative Work. Accepted for special issue of Group Decision and Negotiation (2005).  
6.  Handorean,  R.,  Payton,  J.,  Julien,  C.,  Roman,  G.  Coordination  Middleware  Supporting 

Rapid Deployment of Ad Hoc Mobile Systems. Proc. MCM’03, USA, (2003), 363-368. 

7.  Heinemann,  A.,  Kangasharju,  J.,  Lyardet,  F.,  Mühlhäuser,  M.  iClouds  -  Peer-to-Peer 
Information  Sharing  in  Mobile  Environments.  Lecture  Notes  in  Computer  Science  2790 
(2003), 1038-1045. 

8.  IDC. IDC Remains Optimistic About Handheld Devices, Forecasts 71 Million Shipments 

by 2005. (20  June 2001). URL: http://www.idc.com 

9.  Kortuem, G. Schneider, J., Preuitt, D., Thompson, T., Fickas, S., Segall, Z. When Peer-toPeer 
 Comes  Face-to-Face:  Collaborative  Peer-to-Peer  Computing  in  Mobile  Ad-hoc 
Networks. Proc. P2P’01, Sweden, (2001), 75-93. 

10.  Mascolo,  C.,  Capra,  L.,  Zachariadis,  S.,  Emmerich,  W.  XMIDDLE:  A  Data-Sharing 
Middleware  for  Mobile  Computing.  Journal  on  Personal  and  Wireless  Communications 
21(1), (2002), 77-103. 

11.  Nemlekar,  M.:  Scalable  Distributed  Tuplespaces.  MSc.  Thesis.  Department  of  Electrical 

and Computer Engineering, North Carolina State University, Chapter 5. 2001. 

12.  Ochoa,  S.  Guerrero,  L,  Pino,  J.,  Collazos,  C.  Reusing  Groupware  Components.  Lecture 

Notes in Computer Science 3198 (2004), 262-270. 

13.  Schuckmann,  C.,  Schiimmer,  J.,  Seitz,  P.  Modeling  Collaboration  using  Shared  Objects. 

Proc. GROUP’99, ACM Press, USA, (1999), 189-198. 

14.  Siirtola,  H.,  Heimonen,  T.  Scalable  Support  for  Work  Groups  and  Groupwork.  Proc.  

MobileHCI’01, Dunlop and Brewster (Eds.), France, (2001), 129-134. 

15.  Talja,  S.,  Hansen,  P.  Information  Sharing.  In:  New  Directions  in  Human  Information 

Behavior. Ed. A. Spink & C. Cole. Dordrecht: Kluwer. (2005). 

16.  Templeman,  J.,  Mueller,  J.  COM  Programming  with  Microsoft  .Net.  Microsoft  Press, 

Redmond, Washington. (2003). 

17.  Tschudin, C., Lundgren, H., Nordström, E. Embedding MANETs in the Real World. Proc. 

PWC’03, Italy, (2003), 578-589. 

 

