Mediating Intergenerational Family Communication

with Computer-Supported Domestic Technology

Francisco J. Gutierrez1(✉), Sergio F. Ochoa1, and Julita Vassileva2

1 Department of Computer Science, University of Chile,

Beauchef 851, 3rd Floor, Santiago, Chile

{frgutier,sochoa}@dcc.uchile.cl

2 MADMUC Lab, Department of Computer Science, University of Saskatchewan,

176 Thorvaldson Building, 100 Science Place, Saskatoon, SK, Canada

jiv@cs.usask.ca

Abstract.  The proliferation of social media tools for facilitating interpersonal
communication has inadvertently modiﬁed the ways in which intergenerational
exchanges are supported. However, such technology has generally not acknowl‐
edged the complexity of designing social interaction mechanisms involving older
adults, where the provided technology services and the actual needs of elderly
people are not necessarily aligned. As a way to bridge this gap, we developed
SocialConnector,  a  computer-supported  domestic  system  that  facilitates  and
mediates social interaction among older adults and other family members using
their  preferred  interaction  paradigms  and  communication  media.  This  paper
reports on the results of an empirical in-the-wild study evaluating the mediation
eﬀect of the proposed system with a sample of nine families over nine weeks. The
study results show that older adults using SocialConnector were more engaged
in interacting within their close social networks, whereas social awareness noti‐
ﬁcation messages did encourage user participation between family members and
their  older  adults.  By  addressing  the  lessons  learned  in  this  study,  social
computing designers and practitioners would be in a better position to identify
plausible solutions that would improve user experience and the eﬀectiveness of
computer-supported  mediation  strategies  in  intergenerational  communication
settings.
Keywords: Older adults · Intergenerational interaction · Social media · Domestic
technology · Empirical study · Computer-mediated communication

1

Introduction

In a world where global population is progressively getting older in both developed and
developing economies, there is an increasing interest in deploying domestic supporting
technology  to  encourage  active  aging  in  place  and  promoting  sustainable  informal
elderly caregiving [21]. While family members provide more than 95% of the informal
care for older adults who do not live in nursing homes [11], recent surveys show that
most adults aged 65 and over express a desire to stay at home as long as possible when

© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
C. Gutwin et al. (Eds.): CRIWG 2017, LNCS 10391, pp. 132–147, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-63874-4_11

Mediating Intergenerational Family Communication

133

aging [12]. Therefore, this paradigm is highly praised by governments, since it reduces
the impact of older adults on public health services [14, 18].

In recent years, the study of intergenerational communication has gained the atten‐
tion  of  socio-technical  designers,  researchers,  and  practitioners.  Previous  research
shows that as a person gets older, the size of his/her social networks, sense of social
connection, and interaction frequency all tend to decrease [3, 10], focusing more on
close family members, mainly with their children and grandchildren [19]. This perceived
degradation in social exchanges negatively impacts the physical and mental health of
older adults, and therefore, their wellbeing. In that respect, one of the most important
duties that informal elderly caregivers are expected to fulﬁll is ensuring that older adults
sustain a suitable social health, i.e., favoring the social inclusion within the family
network and avoiding potential negative eﬀects of social isolation. Although face-toface 
interaction and phone calls between older adults and their family members still
prevail, the frequency, quality, and extension of these interactions seem to decrease [6].
The use of information and communication technology (ICT) is in part responsible
of the digital divide that isolates the older adults. However, several researchers state that
ICTs are also able to enhance and improve the social integration of the elderly (e.g. [1,
2,  4]).  Such  technologies  can  play  in  favor  or  against  a  certain  target  population
depending on the ways in which they are designed and used.

To better understand the nuances of intervening in the home of older adults with
domestic social technology, we deployed an interactive system named SocialConnector,
which aims to monitor and mediate intergenerational family communication between
older adults and the rest of their family networks. By analyzing the reports that are
automatically generated by the system, we studied the usage of such a system aiming to
derive implications for designing social computing systems in this domain.

This article contributes in advancing the ﬁeld of computer-supported cooperative
work in family settings by providing contextualized evidence on the design of computerbased 
 technology  to mediate  family  communication  between older  adults  and  their
families,  simultaneously  respecting  the  preferences  and  main  expectations  of  the
involved parties.

The  rest  of  this  paper  is  structured  as  follows.  Section  2  reviews  related  work.
Section  3  introduces  the  SocialConnector  system  and  describes  its  main  services.
Section 4 frames the empirical study design. Section 5 presents the study results, which are
discussed in Sect. 6. Finally, Sect. 7 concludes and provides perspectives on future work.

2 Related Work

Considering older adults in the design of computing systems is complex, since multiple
human and cultural factors must be addressed, which go beyond a mere characterization
of their limitations caused by age or health conditions [15, 20, 23]. Indeed, older adults
might be able to learn and overcome media literacy issues [8], thus eﬀectively evading
the negative eﬀects derived from social isolation. We agree that the elderly can become
active users of digital technologies. However, the design of these tools should be inte‐
grated into their particular sociocultural context, aiming to facilitate their acceptance

134

F.J. Gutierrez et al.

and  appropriation.  For  instance,  the  use  of  common  online  spaces  allows  family
members  to  share their  values and attitudes,  and  strengthen  the ties  across  genera‐
tions [22].

Several authors have conceived domestic systems aimed to encourage the social
integration of older adults. For instance, Garattini et al. [4] developed the Building
Bridges system, a communication prototype installed in the homes of older adults as a
way to enhance social interaction among both friends and strangers. According to the
authors, the system facilitates the interaction among socially isolated older adults. The
device consists of a 12-inch touch screen computer, embedded in a custom-made stand
and incorporating a phone handset with cradle and speakers. Through the system, users
can listen to regular broadcasts and, once they are ﬁnished, they can engage in group
conversations with others. Besides, users can make direct calls to one or more people,
write them short messages, and participate in a public chat room with other participants.
Cornejo et al. [2] developed Tlatoque, a situated display aimed to seamlessly inte‐
grate older adults into the social networking services used by their relatives. The system
was evaluated in Mexico where some elderly family members live abroad. According
to the authors, the device provides the means to ease the integration of older adults to
their social networks, enhancing the asymmetric relations with their younger family
members. The system is a lightweight Facebook client application running on an all-inone 
PC with multi-touch screen capability. To start using the tool, a user acting as
administrator sends an invite to the participating family members from a Facebook
account created for the older adult. Using such information and the services provided
by the Facebook API, the system retrieves the last ten uploaded photographs of the
members in the social network of the elder. Over the time, complementary services
aimed  to  provide  ambient  awareness  to  family  members  were  considered,  such  as:
comments on photos, context of the photo owner, weather, newspaper news, music, and
Facebook likes.

Barbosa et al. [1] developed InTouch, an accessible software application running on
Android-based tablets, targeted to older adults aged 80 and more under risk of social
isolation and loneliness. The system was evaluated with ﬁve residents of a long-term
care facility. The application has a non-language speciﬁc user interface based on icons,
and it supports asynchronous communication. Given that accessibility concerns were
extensively  addressed  during  design,  no  typing  is  required  for  interacting  with  the
system.

While the reviewed systems range from enhancing a sense of community among
older  adults,  to  facilitating  intergenerational  exchanges  with  family  members,  the
novelty of our followed approach is that we explicitly involve the entire family network
in the process. Furthermore, SocialConnector addresses cultural factors that enhance the
perceived value and increase the technology appropriation of older adults interacting
with such systems in collectivistic families. These design decisions, which are addressed
diﬀerently with regard to the nature of cooperative work in informal elderly caregiving
in other Western countries [7], provide an alternative view on how to design domestic
technology to explicitly mediate intergenerational exchanges involving older adults.

Mediating Intergenerational Family Communication

135

3 SocialConnector

The SocialConnector system is a computer-supported intergenerational family commu‐
nication mediator that uses cloud services to allow older adults to interact with their
family networks using touch-based and voice commands [17]. The system mediates the
communication between two parties, so that each participant could interact using their
preferred media. The communication media currently supported are: synchronous and
asynchronous  voice  messaging,  synchronous  video  messaging,  text  messaging,  and
multimedia messaging. SocialConnector runs in a Tablet PC, physically installed in the
older adult’s house in one of two possible arrangements: ﬁxed to a wall (Fig. 1a) or over
a piece of furniture (Fig. 1b).

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1. Possible home arrangements of SocialConnector

Older adults interact with the system using their voice and selecting very simple
options by touching the screen. The design of its user interface was initially informed
by guidelines supported by the research community [13, 24], and later redeﬁned with
participatory iterative prototyping involving a sample of users in the target population.
In terms of functionality, the application also monitors the interactions carried from and
to older adults, and processes ambient data to infer details about the social health of
older adults through embedded sensors in the Tablet PC, particularly the front camera.

3.1 System Description
This system was designed to facilitate the technology adoption and appropriation by
older adults who are ﬁrst-time computer users through seamless and simple user inter‐
faces. The main interaction paradigm involves providing bidirectional synchronous and
asynchronous communication services, exposing social media services to older adults
without the burden of having to manage user accounts and passwords, and allowing
family members to interact with their older adults using the communication media they
prefer. Therefore, SocialConnector internally acts as a communication hub and as a
mediator for enabling, facilitating, and rendering easier the social interaction process
within a family network across multiple generations.

136

F.J. Gutierrez et al.

As a communication mediator, SocialConnector consumes and processes public social
media data retrieved from the accounts of an older adult’s family members, particularly
email, Instagram photos, and Facebook posts. Then, it renders this content in an intuitive
and  accessible  way  for  older  adults,  hiding  behind  a  usable  interface  the  inherent
complexity of retrieving, processing, and transmitting social interaction data from the
cloud  [17]. Therefore, this  system helps  address  the  asymmetry  of  media preference
among family members. Although currently SocialConnector supports Skype, email serv‐
ices, and Instagram, its modular design allows that interacting with any other service
provider—such as WhatsApp, Telegram, or even new social media applications—could
be possible in the future. The main restriction in accessing these services is that the owner
provides access to them through regular Application Programming Interfaces (APIs),
which are used for matching the dedicated connectors of SocialConnector with those
provided by the third-party social media services.

3.2 Design Rationale
Acknowledging that intergenerational communication is asymmetrical [2, 6, 15], and the
preferences of each party might not be negotiable, it turns evident that one major feature
of any mediator has to be providing the means to family members to interact through their
preferred means. Otherwise, the communication process may not be effectively completed,
thus negatively impacting older adults by discouraging socialization [17].

The design of SocialConnector followed an iterative user-centered approach [9],
involving  multiple  cycles  of  design,  prototyping,  evaluation,  and  reﬁnement  of  the
proposed services. Following an empirical approach, we worked directly with diﬀerent
samples of older adults who interacted with the system and tested it through successive
stages of prototyping, until reaching a mature and robust product that could be evaluated
in a real-life scenario. In particular, we followed the recommendations suggested by
Barbosa Neves et al. [1] on design considerations for facilitating the adoption of commu‐
nication technology by older adults.

3.3 Mediating Intergenerational Family Communication
The interaction services provided by SocialConnector have been conceived and itera‐
tively reﬁned based on the deﬁnition of intergenerational communication and caregiving
roles, as well as the attitudes, expectations, viewpoints, and concerns of family members
regarding computer-supported communication mediators, as deﬁned by Gutierrez and
Ochoa [7]. Therefore, the current version of the system implements ﬁve communication
channels (upper menu in Fig. 2), through which older adults can interact with their family
members using regular social media services. Next we brieﬂy explain each channel.
• Video calls. This service provides access to audio/video calls mediated through Skype.
Once the older adult selects this option in the menu, SocialConnector displays a list of
contacts presented as an interactive carousel, where the names and profile pictures of
his/her family members are displayed. The user just needs to select the target contact for
initiating  the  call,  without  having  to  require  a  username  or  password.  In  fact,

Mediating Intergenerational Family Communication

137

SocialConnector internally manages the user authentication process using the creden‐
tials stored in the system. Then, it gives the session token to Skype for making the call.
Once both parties end up the videoconference session, the system regains the session
token and the user interface is redirected to home, leaving the user at the same starting
point, ready for a new interaction.

• Outgoing messages. The older adult using SocialConnector can send a message to a
family member of his/her choice through email. In order to simplify the process of
composing a new message, the older adult uses a speech-to-text service in which he/she
dictates the message he desires to send to his family member, and SocialConnector
internally manages the user authentication and sends the email.

• Incoming messages. Through this service, the system displays the ten most recent
messages received in the social media accounts of the older adult. In particular, this
component translates the message structure from the original source, and uniformizes
it in a format that can be understood by the older adult interacting with the system. In
order to prevent misuse and spamming from external sources, this service filters the
incoming messages to those belonging to the list of contacts—family members—that
was defined during setup.

• Incoming photos. Similar to the previous service, in this module SocialConnector
organizes  the  incoming  photos  and  other  multimedia  content,  rendering  it  in  an
accessible and uniform  way to older adult. Although  this  service was originally
conceived as an output channel of content, i.e., not providing the means for a direct
interaction between the family member publishing the contact and the older adult,
through conducting pilot ﬁeld studies of SocialConnector we realized that this service
could be used as a mechanism to trigger interactions between the involved parties.
• Photo album. This is a collection of the most recent media content sent to the older
adult by his/her contacts. The photos displayed in this album are organized as an
interactive carousel where the older adult can navigate through them. During the last
stages of prototyping with end users, we learned that older adults found a hidden
value in this service by augment the stored photos with short messages, hence acting
as a sort of shared memory between the older adult and his/her contacts.
In addition to the presented services, SocialConnector manages notification mech‐
anisms. On the one hand, they serve to alert the older adult of new content within the
system (i.e., notification badges, as shown in Fig. 2). On the other hand, they can act
as  social awareness  triggers to alert family members,  such  as  in the case of  new
content created by the older adult, or as reminders for engaging them in social inter‐
action. Finally, given that SocialConnector runs on a Tablet PC, it uses the embedded
sensors in the hardware to assist in monitoring the activities of the older adult in a
non-invasive way.

138

F.J. Gutierrez et al.

Fig. 2. Interaction services provided to older adults (main user interface)

4 Study Design

Through  an  empirical  in-the-wild  study,  we evaluated the  eﬀect  of  introducing  the
SocialConnector system at the home of a sample of older adults, and mediating their
interaction  with  their  family  network  using  social  awareness  mechanisms  (i.e.,
reminders  and  notiﬁcations).  In  particular,  we  gathered  quantitative  data  regarding
system usage by older adults through automatically generated system usage logﬁles,
which were then aggregated for conducting the data analysis.

4.1 Participants
Through  online  notices,  email  lists,  and  convenience  and  snowball  sampling,  we
recruited  nine  middle-class  adults  acting  as  informal  caregivers  for  their  parents.
Following the characterization on intergenerational communication and elderly care‐
giving family roles proposed by Gutierrez and Ochoa [7], these participants assumed at
the time of the study either the role of assistant or monitor within their families.

We centered our sampling strategy on these recruited caregivers, extending then to
their  wider  family  network.  In  particular,  we  approached  the  informal  caregivers’
parents (who were the main targets of the proposed intervention) as well as their siblings,
children, and nephews. In all cases, participants had to be over the age of 14 and explic‐
itly express their intention of being part of the study. Furthermore, we restricted the
study sample to cover at least one older adult, one assistant, one monitor, one helper,
and one outsider in each participating family. Table 1 summarizes the structure of the
participant family networks. In each family network, gender and age of each participant
are provided.

Mediating Intergenerational Family Communication

139

Table 1. Structure of participating family networks

Older adults Assistants
1M (81)

Monitors
0F
2M (48, 39)
1F (49)
0M
1F (33)
1M (38)
1F (37)
0M
0F
2M (49, 25)
1F (44)
1M (42)
1F (38)
0M
1F (66)
0M
1F (36)
1M (37)

Helpers
1F (36)
1M (19)
1F (23)
1M (51)
2F (39, 37)
0M
0M
1M (25)
2F (48, 41)
0M
0F
1M (41)
0F
1M (31)
0F
1M (34)
1F (39)
0M

Outsiders
3F (21, 17, 14)
0M
0F
2M (18, 21)
0F
1M (16)
1F (19)
0M
0F
2M (25, 23)
2F (21, 19)
0M
0F
1M (29)
1F (38)
0M
1F (16)
1M (15)

Family
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

1M (78)

1F (69)

1F (73)

1F (75)

1M (72)

1F (79)

1M (71)

1F (80)

1F (71)
0M
1F (54)
0M
0F
1M (31)
1F (44)
1M (41)
0F
1M (42)
1F (39)
0M
1F (34)
1M (29)
1F (68)
1M (69)
1F (59)
1M (30)

The ﬁnal study sample was composed of 64 people across 9 family networks (n = 9,
7, 7, 6, 8, 7, 6, 6, 8, respectively in each family). All families were based in Santiago,
Chile, and were spread across several households within the urban area of the city.

4.2 Materials
Each older adult participating in the study was provided with a tablet PC equipped with
the latest version of the prototype system. The evaluated version of SocialConnector
runs on a 9.6-inches Samsung Galaxy Tab E tablet under Android 4.4 as operative
system.

In order to control the eﬀect of Internet bandwidth in the perceived user experience,
we equipped each tablet with a SIM card providing mobile access to Internet over 3G.
Participants in each family interact with the older adult using their own terminals over
Skype (for instant messaging) and email (for direct messages and photo albums).

4.3 Procedure
We structured the study design in three stages, spanning over a time period of nine weeks.
• Setup. We recruited a sample of informal family caregivers, who acted as seeds for
recruiting the family networks participating in the study and will assume the role of
coordinator during the study. Being a family coordinator involves setting up the
device by collecting and managing the social network data of family members within

140

F.J. Gutierrez et al.

the system, and assisting the older adult on using the system in case of need. After
conducting a short interview with the candidate caregivers, we screened their family
networks against the stated sample requirements. Once deﬁned and conﬁrmed the
participant  family  networks,  we  asked  all  members  for  their  explicit,  free,  and
informed  consent  to  participate  in  the  study.  Finally,  we  organized  an  informal
meeting at the home of the participating older adult with the assistance of the coor‐
dinator,  where  we  installed  the  system  at  a  location  chosen  by  the  older  adult,
performed a demonstration on its usage, and asked the informal caregiver acting as
coordinator to setup the initial data of the involved family members. All participants
were aware that the system would track their interactions with the older adult and
were left with information sheets on the proposed services and contact information
of both the caregiver acting as coordinator and the research team.

• System usage. A daily log of the system usage by the older adult was automatically
generated and reviewed by the research team every day. In such a log, we kept the
following data: (1) incoming Skype calls, (2) outgoing Skype calls, (3) incoming
email messages, (4) outgoing messages, and (5) incoming photos. The system usage
was tracked for a period of nine weeks. During the ﬁrst three (i.e., pre-intervention),
we did not integrate any method for mediating the interaction with other family
members. During the following three weeks (i.e.,  intervention), we introduced a
social awareness mechanism informing the family members on the eﬀect of their
interaction with the older adult (e.g., we send an informal message once the older
adult has read an email sent by them), and we explicitly send periodic messages to
family members to invite them to interact with the older adult. In order to contrast
the eﬀect of this intervention with the baseline measure obtained on the setup stage
of the study and on the pre-intervention stage of system usage (i.e., post-interven‐
tion), we removed these awareness mechanisms during the last three weeks of the
trial.

• Closure. After the nine weeks of the deployment, we organized a second informal
meeting with each family at the home of the older adult. In these meetings, the ﬁrst
author moderated in each family a focus group contrasting the viewpoints of all
participants regarding their perceptions on system usefulness, family connection,
privacy issues, motivation, reasons to use/not use the system, and articulation with
the  informal  elderly  caregiving  process.  By  the  end  of  the  family  meeting,  we
removed the device from the home of the older adult.

4.4 Data Collection and Analysis
By studying the generated log ﬁles reporting the interaction activity with the Social‐
Connector system, we aim to study whether the system encourages a sustainable increase
in the frequency of social interaction exchanges from/to the family older adults. This
can be formulated in the following two work hypotheses:
• (H1) The social awareness mediation increases the frequency of exchanges with older

adults; and

Mediating Intergenerational Family Communication

141

• (H2) After removing the mediation prompts, such frequency of exchanges does not

decrease.
We studied the main eﬀect of the intervention following a one-way repeated meas‐
ures ANOVA. In those cases where the collected data violated the assumption of spher‐
icity,  we corrected accordingly  the degrees of  freedom  for the  eﬀect  following the
Greenhouse-Geisser procedure. In order to study both contrasts, we performed post-hoc
tests whenever the main eﬀect was deemed signiﬁcant. In such a case, we adjusted
accordingly  the  signiﬁcance  level  following  the  Bonferroni  correction  for  multiple
comparisons.

All statistical analyses were conducted using SPSS 21. The calculation of Cohen’s d
effect size value was performed following the method proposed by Morris and DeShon
[16] for within-subjects studies. We considered α = 0.05 as significance cut-off.

5 Results

In order to study the eﬀect of mediating the interaction within the family network through
contextualized social triggers, we ran a one-way repeated measures ANOVA to compare
the volume of incoming calls, messages, and photos in three times: pre-intervention
(weeks 1 to 3), during the intervention (weeks 4 to 6), and post-intervention (weeks 7
to 9). Figure 3 shows the volume of incoming interaction along the study.

Fig. 3. Volume of incoming interaction through SocialConnector

Mauchly’s test indicated that the assumption of sphericity had not been violated,
χ2(2) = 0.031, p = 0.985; therefore, degrees of freedom were not corrected. The results
show that there was a signiﬁcant eﬀect of mediating the interaction with social awareness
notiﬁcations: F(2, 16) = 28.83, p < 0.001, partial η2 = 0.783.

Three  paired-samples  t-tests  were  used  to  make  post  hoc  comparisons  between
conditions  with  p-values  and  signiﬁcance  levels  adjusted  following  the  Bonferroni

142

F.J. Gutierrez et al.

correction. A ﬁrst paired-samples t-test indicated that there was a signiﬁcant diﬀerence
in the scores for pre-intervention (M = 91.1, SD = 19.1) and intervention (M = 149.8,
SD  =  25.3)  conditions;  t(8)  =  −7.223,  p  <  0.001,  95%CI  =  [−83.182,  −34.172],
d = −2.466. A second paired-samples t-test indicated that there was a signiﬁcant diﬀer‐
ence in the scores for pre-intervention (M = 91.1, SD = 19.1) and post-intervention
(M = 133.1, SD = 31.1) conditions; t(8) = −5.458, p = 0.002, 95%CI = [−65.208,
−18.792], d = −2.063. Finally, running a third paired-samples t-test indicated that there
was not a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the scores for intervention (M = 149.8, SD = 25.3)
and post-intervention (M = 133.1,  SD = 31.1) conditions; t(8) = 2.067, p = 0.218,
95%CI = [−7.647, 40.981], d = 0.705.

These results suggest that mediating the interaction of family members with notiﬁ‐
cation triggers does have an eﬀect on the volume of calls, messages, and photos sent to
the older adults participating in the study. More speciﬁcally, our results suggest that
during and after sending contextualized social awareness reminders to family members,
they tend to increase their volume of interactions with their older adult. However, further
research needs to be conducted in order to verify if the eﬀect of intervening the social
interaction space of the involved family members lasts longer than the observed period
in the study.

Similarly, aiming to understand how older adults interacted with the system as a way
to communicate with their fellow family members throughout the observed period, we
ran a one-way repeated measures ANOVA to compare the volume of outgoing calls and
messages following the three stages in which the experiment was divided: pre-inter‐
vention (weeks 1 to 3), during the intervention (weeks 4 to 6), and post-intervention
(weeks 7 to 9). Figure 4 shows the volume of outgoing interaction—originated from
older adults and mediated through the system—throughout the study.

Fig. 4. Volume of outgoing interaction through SocialConnector

Mauchly’s  test  indicated  that  the  assumption  of  sphericity  was  violated,
χ2(2)  =  6.152,  p  =  0.046;  therefore,  degrees  of  freedom  were  corrected  using

Mediating Intergenerational Family Communication

143

Greenhouse-Geisser estimates of sphericity (ε = 0.631). The results show that there was
a signiﬁcant eﬀect of time on the volume of outgoing interactions generated from the
older  adults  participating  in  the  study:  F(1.26,  10.09)  =  6.367,  p  =  0.025,  partial
η2 = 0.443.

Three  paired-samples  t-tests  were  used  to  make  post  hoc  comparisons  between
conditions: pre-intervention (M = 17.1, SD = 13.5), intervention (M = 24.7, SD = 16.4),
and post-intervention (M = 28.3, SD = 19.9). None of the pairwise comparisons were
seen as signiﬁcant, when adjusting the p-values and signiﬁcance levels with the Bonfer‐
roni  correction:  pre-intervention  vs.  intervention:  t(8)  =  −2.630,  p  =  0.091,
95%CI  =  [−16.219,  1.108],  d  =  −0.928;  pre  vs.  post:  t(8)  =  −2.654,  p  =  0.087,
95%CI =  [−23.975,  1.531],  d =  −1.007;  and  intervention  vs.  post:  t(8)  = −1.687,
p = 0.390, 95%CI = [−10.220, 2.887], d = −0.666.

These results suggest that there is a slight tendency in time to increase the frequency
of  outgoing  interactions,  although  not  statistically  signiﬁcant  between  experimental
conditions. Therefore, we cannot generalize that this situation will be sustained in time.
We  hypothesize  that this  tendency  can be  attributed  to  either:  (1)  a  learning  eﬀect
and/or (2) a positive moderation on the frequency of outgoing interaction due to the
increasing volume of interaction produced by family members (i.e., given that family
members contact the older adult more frequently, s/he will contact them back more
frequently).

6 Discussion

The  aggregated  results  for  the  variables  measured  through  SocialConnector  (i.e.,
incoming calls, messages, and photos, and outgoing calls and messages) show that there
was a signiﬁcant main eﬀect on the interaction mediated by the system before and after
the introduction of social awareness messages; this supports H1. Furthermore, this eﬀect
was not aﬀected after the messages were removed from the system (H2), although we
can only argue for the validity of this eﬀect on the studied period.

Following the study results, notiﬁcation messages are an eﬀective way to mediate
the social interaction between family members and older adults. However, this eﬀect
has not been necessarily reciprocated by older adults, who did not show increasing levels
on their participation as a result of this mediation. Nevertheless, they did show increasing
values on their engagement with the SocialConnector system, either by a learning eﬀect
or by an indirect positive feedback on their activity production (i.e., outgoing calls and
messages) due to an increasing number of incoming calls, messages, and photos.

Similarly, this observation was also suggested by the results of outgoing interaction;
however, we cannot attribute the mediation of social awareness messages as a cause to
the slight increase on older adults’ mediated calls and photos through SocialConnector,
given that post hoc test results were not statistically signiﬁcant. In that respect, we
hypothesize that this variation could be due either to a learning eﬀect or to an indirect
feedback on the behavior of older adults triggered by a positive increase on incoming
calls, messages, and photos sent by other members in the family network. In any case,
replicating this study with a larger sample of older adults could possibly increase the

144

F.J. Gutierrez et al.

statistical power of tests, and therefore provide more ground for validating or not the
stated hypotheses.

6.1 Implications to Design
As broader design concepts, we identiﬁed in the exit focus groups that the design of
computer-supported intergenerational communication mediators needs to account for
the opposed views on ageism and technology design. These views particularly contrast
the perceived independence assumed by older adults and the views on decline and tech‐
nology  reluctance  raised  by  their family  members.  In  particular,  that  of  the  family
members who are more closely involved in assuming caregiving tasks.

While prior literature acknowledges the existence of a vicious circle on technology
adoption, particularly that expressed by older adults in collectivistic families [Guti16],
the study results go a step further in this line of research. In particular, the study results
imply  that  socio-domestic  computing  systems  aiming  to  mediate  intergenerational
family communication need to account for the diversity of views and involvement of
diﬀerent stakeholders within the family network.

The perceived eﬀects of mediating the social interaction space with SocialConnector
are also in line with the claims of Grönvall and Verdezoto [5], which state that supporting
systems should move away from passive monitoring and surveillance, to solutions that
assess and assist the individual enforcing active information seeking. In that respect, the
design of SocialConnector as a mediator, while uses as input monitoring data retrieved
from ambient sensors, the main intervention in the social interaction space is pushed
toward family members in the supporting network. Therefore, design considerations,
such as personalization and adaptation in persuasive and social awareness triggers, will
be addressed in future research.

6.2 Study Limitations
While valuable, the reported results are only applicable to the studied participants as the
sample size is not big enough for yielding high statistical power, which would warrant
generalization for a broader population. Regarding the qualitative analysis grounded on
the mediation eﬀect of SocialConnector in the studied nine families, the implications of
the study ﬁndings are applicable only to the particular socio-cultural scenario.

7 Conclusions and Future Work

In this paper we presented the main ﬁndings of a mixed-methods in-home study, under‐
standing the mediation eﬀect of SocialConnector in a sample of intergenerational fami‐
lies. On the one hand, we measured how older adults and their family members interacted
through the system. On the other hand, we explored the implications of the mediation
of SocialConnector across the studied family networks through a focus group session
with each family at the end of the trial.

Mediating Intergenerational Family Communication

145

The  obtained  results  suggest  that  older  adults  using  SocialConnector  did  show
increased social engagement, particularly with family members, when exposed to inter‐
acting with the system over a period of nine weeks. In particular, regarding the mediation
with  family  members  in  the  surrounding  network,  social  awareness  notiﬁcation
messages to encourage user participation are an eﬀective way to mediate the social
interaction space of the involved parties. Although subtle, the study results also show
there was an increase in the produced outgoing interaction of older adults with their
family members, which can be attributed either to a learning eﬀect or an indirect positive
feedback due to an increased volume of incoming messages, calls, and photos.

In terms of design, we inferred implications that can be used to inform the develop‐
ment of further software applications or functionality to better impact the social inter‐
action space of family members. In particular, the study results suggest that older adults
liked  interacting  with  SocialConnector,  as  it  oﬀered  them  an  alternative  way  for
engaging in social interaction with fellow family members. However, participating older
adults also reﬂected on a major concern  involving privacy matters and information
disclosure across the family network. The reason behind this concern can be attributed
to an intention to not worry or burden the family members caring for them, and because
there is still a reticence on trusting an external agent—such as SocialConnector—for
mediating intergenerational communication about personal matters.

As future work we will explore the relationship between system usage and discrim‐
inant factors, such as: gender, prior experience of older adults using computer-based
technology, whether they share or not their household, and their social engagement.
Similarly, we plan to extend our qualitative analysis on system usage and perceived
value, by conducting individual semi-structured interviews with the participating family
members in this study.

Acknowledgments.  This work has been partially supported by the Fondecyt Project (Chile),
grant: 1150252. The work of Francisco J. Gutierrez has been supported by the Ph.D. Scholarship
Program of Conicyt Chile (CONICYT-PCHA/Doctorado Nacional/2013-21130075).

References

1. Barbosa Neves, B., Franz, R.L., Munteanu, C., Baecker, R., Ngo, M.: My hand doesn’t listen
to me!: adoption and evaluation of a communication technology for the ‘Oldest Old’. In:
Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI
2015, pp. 1593–1602. ACM Press, New York (2015)

2. Cornejo, R., Tentori, M., Favela, J.: Enriching in-person encounters through social media: a
study on family connectedness for the elderly. Int. J. Hum Comput Stud. 71(9), 889–899
(2013)

3. Dean, A., Kolody, B., Wood, P., Matt, G.E.: The inﬂuence of living alone on depression in

elderly persons. J. Aging Health 4(1), 3–18 (1992)

4. Garattini,  C.,  Wherton,  J.,  Prendergast,  D.:  Linking  the  lonely:  an  exploration  of  a
communication technology designed to support social interaction among older adults. Univ.
Access Inf. Soc. 11(2), 211–222 (2012)

146

F.J. Gutierrez et al.

5. Grönvall, E., Verdezoto, N.: Beyond self-monitoring: understanding non-functional aspects
of  home-based  healthcare  technology.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  ACM  International  Joint
Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing, UbiComp 2013, pp. 587–596. ACM
Press, New York (2013)

6. Gutierrez, F.J., Ochoa, S.F.: Mom, i do have a family!: attitudes, agreements, and expectations
on the interaction  with chilean  older adults. In: Proceedings of the  ACM Conference on
Computer-Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing, CSCW 2016, pp. 1400–1409.
ACM Press, New York (2016)

7. Gutierrez, F.J., Ochoa, S.F.: It takes at least two to tango: understanding the cooperative nature
of elderly caregiving in Latin America. In: Proceedings of the ACM Conference on ComputerSupported 
Cooperative Work and Social Computing, CSCW 2017, pp. 1618–1630. ACM
Press, New York (2017)

8. Harley,  D.,  Fitzpatrick,  G.:  YouTube  and  intergenerational  communication:  the  case  of

Geriatric 1927. Univ. Access Inf. Soc. 8(1), 5–20 (2009)

9. Harper, R., Rodden, T., Rogers, Y., Sellen, A.: Being Human: Human-Computer Interaction

in the Year 2020. Microsoft Research, Cambridge (2008)

10. Hawkley, L.C., Masi, C.M., Berry, J.D., Cacioppo, J.T.: Loneliness is a unique predictor of

age-related diﬀerences in systolic blood pressure. Psychol. Aging 21(1), 152–164 (2006)

11. Kaye, H.S., Harrington, C., Laplante, M.P.: Long-term care: who gets it, who provides it, who

pays, and how much? Health Aﬀ. 29(1), 11–21 (2010)

12. Kochera, A., Straight, A., Guterbock, T.: Beyond 50.05 – a report to the nation on livable
communities:  creating  environments  for  successful  aging  (2005).  https://assets.aarp.org/
rgcenter/il/beyond_50_communities.pdf. Accessed 27 Jun 2017

13. Kurniawan, S., Zaphiris, P.: Research-derived web design guidelines for older people. In:
Proceedings  of  the  International  ACM  SIGACCESS  Conference  on  Computers  and
Accessibility, ASSETS 2005, pp. 129–135. ACM Press, New York (2005)

14. Lewin, D., Adshead, S., Glennon, B., Williamson, B., Moore, T., Damodaran, L., Hansell, P.:
Assisted Living Technologies for Older and Disabled People in 2030: A Final Report to
Ofcom. Plum Consulting, United Kingdom (2010)

15. Lindley,  S.E.,  Harper,  R.,  Sellen,  A.:  Designing  for  elders:  exploring  the  complexity  of
relationships in later life. In: Proceedings of the British HCI Group Annual Conference on
HCI, BCS-HCI 2008, pp. 77–86. ACM Press, New York (2008)

16. Morris, S.B., Deshon, R.P.: Combining eﬀect size estimates in meta-analysis with repeated

measures and independent-groups designs. Psychol. Methods 7(1), 105–125 (2002)

17. Muñoz, D., Cornejo, R., Gutierrez, F.J., Favela, J., Ochoa, S.F., Tentori, M.: A social cloudbased 
tool to deal with time and media mismatch of intergenerational family communication.
Fut. Gener. Comput. Syst. 53, 140–151 (2015)

18. Mynatt, E.D., Melenhorst, A.-S., Frisk, A.D., Rogers, W.A.: Aware technologies for aging in
place: understanding user needs and attitudes. IEEE Pervasive Comput. 3(2), 36–41 (2004)
19. Osorio-Parraguez, P., Seguel, A.G.: Social construction of dependence in elderly men in Chile.

Health 6, 998–1003 (2014)

20. Östlund, B.: Design paradigms and misunderstood technology: the case of older adults. In:
Östlund,  B.  (ed.)  Young  Technologies  in  Old  Hands:  An  International  View  on  Senior
Citizen’s Utilization of ICT. DJOF Publishing, Copenhagen (2005)

21. Roberts, C., Mort, M., Milligan, C.: Calling for care: ‘Disembodied’ work, teleoperators, and

older people living at home. Sociology 46(3), 490–506 (2012)

22. Siibak, A., Tamme, V.: ‘Who introduced granny to Facebook?’: an exploration of everyday
family interactions in web-based communication environments. Northern Lights Film Media
Stud. Yearb. 11(1), 71–89 (2013)

Mediating Intergenerational Family Communication

147

23. Sun, Y., Ding, X., Lindtner, S., Lu, T., Gu, N.: Being senior and ICT: a study of seniors using
ICT  in  China.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  ACM  SIGCHI  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in
Computing Systems, CHI 2014, pp. 3933–3942. ACM Press, New York (2014)

24. World Wide Web Consortium: Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0. http://

www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/. Accessed 30 Mar 2017

