 

Using a History-Based Approach to Predict Topology 

Control Information in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks 

Pere Millán1, Carlos Molina1, Roc Meseguer2, Sergio F. Ochoa3, and Rodrigo Santos4 

1 Department of Computer Engineering, Universitat Rovira i Virgili, Tarragona, Spain 

2 Department of Computer Architecture, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain 

3 Department of Computer Science, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile 

4 Department of Electrical Engineering, Universidad Nacional del Sur, Bahia Blanca, Argentina   

{pere.millan,carlos.molina}@urv.net, meseguer@ac.upc.edu,  

sochoa@dcc.uchile.cl, ierms@uns.edu.ar 

Abstract.  Several  social  computing  participation  strategies,  such  as 
crowdsensing and crowdsourcing, use mobile ad hoc or opportunistic networks 
to support the users activities. The unreliability and dynamism of these communication 
links make routing protocols a key component to achieve efficient and 
reliable data communication in physical environments. Often these routing capabilities 
come at expenses of flooding the network with a huge amount of topology 
control information (TCI), which can overload the communication links 
and dramatically increase the energy consumption of the participating devices. 
In previous works the authors have shown that predicting the network topology 
in  these  work  scenarios  helps  reduce  the  number  of  control packets  delivered 
through the network. This saves energy and increases the available bandwidth. 
This paper presents a study that extends the authors’ previous works, by identifying 
the impact of predicting the TCI generated by routing protocols in these 
networks.  The  prediction  process  is  done  following  a  history-based  approach 
that uses information of the nodes past behavior. The paper also determines the 
predictability limits of this strategy, assuming that a TCI message can be correctly 
predicted if it appeared at least once in the past. The results show that the 
upper-bound limit of the history-based prediction approach is high, and that realistic 
prediction mechanisms can achieve significant ratios of accuracy. Mobile 
collaborative applications and routing protocols using mobile ad hoc or opportunistic 
networks can take advantage of this prediction approach to reduce network 
traffic, and consequently, the energy consumption of their devices. 

Keywords:  Network  Topology  Prediction,  History-Based  Prediction,  Routing 
Protocols, Mobile Ad Hoc Networks, Mobile Collaboration. 

1 

Introduction 

Mobile  computing  and  wireless  networks  are  part  of  our  life.  Everyday  more  and 
more  people  are  becoming  a  part  of  collaborative  networks  to  share  several  information,
 such as the status of the vehicular traffic in an area, the security level of a city 
zone, or the location of interesting places to visit while performing touristic activities.   

G. Fortino et al. (Eds.): IDCS 2014, LNCS 8729, pp. 237–249, 2014. 
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014 

238 

P. Millán et al. 

In many scenarios, the networks of these applications are wireless and ad hoc, and 
the provision of the applications’ services makes sense only if the consumer (i.e. the 
end-user) is localized near to the service provider. For instance, during lunch time the 
restaurants located in a promenade area can deliver special offers to the smartphone of 
the passers-by, motivating them to take lunch in those places. If the service providers 
(i.e. the restaurants) use WiFi to irradiate these messages to the people, then this process 
will need to use message routing to reach the devices of potential clients that are 
located to more than one-hop of distance from the provider. This means more than 80100 
meters in open areas or more than 30-25 meters in build areas.   

The routing protocols used in these mobile collaboration scenarios must be simple, 
efficient, reliable and they have to quickly adapt themselves to changes in the network 
topology [1, 2, 3, 4]. Moreover, these protocols should minimize the delivery of topology 
control information (TCI) to avoid consuming too much energy of the passers-
by’ devices. Link-state proactive-routing protocols could be used in these scenarios to 
support  interaction  among  devices,  since  they  have  low  latency  when  sending  data 
through ad hoc networks. The latency is low because these protocols utilize an optimized 
 and  known  data-path  for  delivering  messages  to  the  destination  nodes  [5]. 
However, this advantage comes at the cost of periodically flooding the network with 
TCI that negatively impacts the energy consumption of the nodes.   

Medina et al. [6] and Meseguer et al. [7] show that the traffic generated by OLSR 
(Optimized Link State Routing protocol [5]) for different nodes densities, grows almost 
exponentially with the number of nodes. Therefore, for a large number of nodes, 
a huge amount of TCI should be delivered through the network. This not only overloads 
 the  communication  links,  but  also  increases  the  energy  consumption  of  the 
nodes. The authors have also shown that the problem of delivering much control information 
through the network can be addressed using predictions [6, 8]. Particularly, 
the  OLSRp  (OLSR  with  prediction)  protocol  was  proposed  to  eliminate  redundant 
control information, and thus, to reduce CPU and energy consumption in mobile adhoc 
networks. This prediction mechanism is based on the assumption that the last TCI 
send by a node will probably be repeated during the next round of information delivery.
 The results of this prediction strategy show that this simple algorithm can reduce 
considerably  the  number  of  control  packets  (CP)  transmitted  through  the  network, 
saving computational processing and energy consumption, without affecting the routing 
capability of the protocol. 

However,  this  prediction  process  sometimes  introduces  additional  complexity  to 
routing  protocols,  because  additional  hardware,  software,  or  both  of  them,  must  be 
devoted to make a prediction, and possibly to validate it. Moreover, the prediction can 
also  introduce  additional  time-penalties  to  the  system,  mainly  when  the  rate  of 
mispredictions  is  high.  On  average,  if  the  percentage  of  right  predictions  is  high 
enough,  the  overall  performance  of  the  routing  protocols  can  be  significantly  improved 
at a reasonable hardware/software cost. The same concerns can be extended to 
computer networks, as they also have been aware of prediction techniques in several 
ways,  such  as  energy-efficient  routing  [9,  10],  nodes  sleeping-state  scheduling   
[11,  12],  reliability  [13,  14],  link-quality  tracking  [15,  16]  and  routing-traffic   
reduction [6, 7, 8]. 

 

 

Using a History-Based Approach to Predict Topology Control Information 

239 

This paper extends the proposal described in [2, 4], by presenting and evaluating a 
new  strategy  for  predicting  TCI  in  mobile  ad  hoc  and  opportunistic  networks.  This 
new prediction approach uses a time window, in which the historical TCI of a node is 
considered to predict the next TCI. By using simulations, this proposal determines the 
performance of the history-based prediction in several mobile scenarios. The scenarios 
used in these simulations are representative of some everyday life activities, where 
people freely move around a certain area, and eventually interact with other people in 
these places. The obtained results help designers of both, routing protocols and mobile 
 collaborative  systems,  to  conceive  more  efficient  ways  to  manage  the  TCI  in 
these scenarios. 

2 

Predicting TCI Using Past Information 

Although it seems to be a good idea to use historical TCI to make predictions of the 
next  control  packets  [8],  it  is  important  to  determine  the  performance  and  limits  of 
this  approach.  Only  after  that,  it  would  be  possible  to  determine  in  which  mobile 
computing scenarios this proposal can provide a real benefit.   

The history-based prediction (HBP) approach considers that each node keeps updated 
 locally  (in  a  table)  the  recent  history  of  the  TCI  received  from  its  neighbors. 
The prediction process performed in such a node takes this information as input, and 
produces  a  prediction  of  TCI  for  each  neighbor.  Thus,  it  tries  to  guess  the  network 
topology without delivering control information. The prediction that a node makes for 
a  TCI  of  a  neighbor  can  be  done  whenever  the  recently  TCI  received  from  such  a 
neighbor, matches with the previously TCI stored by that node. It is important to notice 
that the HBP approach is focused on predicting a state that has already appeared 
in the past. 

In order to understand the performance of the HBP approach, we performed several 
simulations  using  unbounded  tables  with  historical  information.  These  unbounded 
tables give more flexibility to identify patterns in the nodes’ movements, and thus to 
try  guess  the  next  topology  of  the  network.  This  pattern  identification  can  be  done 
analyzing the tables with historical information that each node keeps for such a purpose.
 Each movement pattern corresponds just to a sequence of TCI packets (one or 
more), that the node making the prediction has seen in the past (and it has registered 
in its local table). Attached to every pattern stored in the table there is a list of all the 
packets that appeared after such a pattern. These packets could be predicted depending 
on the prediction strategy used by the node.   

The table with historical information also records some statistical information that 
helps the prediction process to select one option among several candidate node mobility 
patterns; i.e., to determine which is the most suitable candidate (pattern) to match 
with the next TCI packet in the current prediction scenario. In short, an entry of the 
table will be composed by an input (TCI packets representing the pattern), an output 
(a  list  of  control  packets  that  appeared  after  each  particular  pattern)  and  statistical 
information (related to every output, which helps predict the next control packet). For 
every  entry,  it  is  maintained  a  list  of  all  CPs  that  appeared  after  the  pattern  that  is 

 

240 

P. Millán et al. 

under consideration by the prediction process. The statistics attached to the table establish 
both, the most frequent and the last packet of the pattern.   

In  order  to  analyze  properly  the  usefulness  of  this  historical  information  for  the 
prediction process, we have defined the history depth (HD) metric. This metric can be 
calculated  as  the  number  of  TCI  packets  that  compose  a  movement  pattern.  In  our 
study, the HD can assume values from 0 to 5. If we consider for instance a table with 
HD=1, this means that the number of packets that identify each pattern is one. Therefore,
 there will be one entry in the table for every control packet (CP) that appeared in 
the past. We believe that high HD means more accurate predictions, but few opportunities 
 for  predicting,  because  the  packets  sequences  are  long.  Contrarily,  low  HD 
means more opportunities for predicting, but less accuracy in the predictions.   

Based on the information stored in this table, we use and analyze the performance 
of three different flavors of the HBP approach: last value (it uses the last packet of the 
pattern to make the predictions), most-frequent value (it uses the most-frequent packet 
for predicting the next TCI) and random value (it uses any packet from the list, which 
is randomly selected). For instance, the OLSRp mechanism [6] assumes a last-value 
policy and HD=0 for predicting the next control packet with TCI. Probably, this is the 
most simple prediction mechanism, as just one control packet has to be stored and no 
statistics have to be maintained. Even this simple strategy has shown to be useful for 
reducing the traffic of TCI and energy consumption in mobile ad hoc networks [7, 8]. 
The different flavors of the HBP approach must not only succeed in their predictions,
 but also not predict when this success is not guaranteed. In our scenario, success 
reduces the  network traffic and saves energy consumption, but incorrect predictions 
can skew the network topology map, and therefore decrease the reliability of the process.
  In  this  paper,  we  include  a  confidence  mechanism  to  determine  the  likelihood 
that a prediction done using the HBP approach is correct. This could help both, maximize 
right and minimize wrong predictions. We assume a simple confidence mechanism,
 which determines if every packet of the output data list of a pattern was already 
predicted. If so, a counter is incremented by 1. Otherwise, it is decremented by 1. The 
counter is initialized as 1, and it can assume values in the range from 0 to 3. We consider 
that a prediction is confident, if the counter is equal or higher than 2.   

Although this confidence mechanism can helps us improve the prediction accuracy,
  if  we  assume  a  fixed  HD,  the  opportunities  for  predicting  TCI  packets  remain 
fixed. Therefore, in this article we analyze an additional flavor of the HBP approach, 
in  which the HD is not initially  fixed. We call this strategy as  prediction  tree. This 
strategy predicts the TCI assuming the maximum HD. Every time that it is not possible 
 to  do  such  an  assumption  (e.g.  because  there  is  not  an  entry  or  enough  confi-
dence), the HD will be decreased by 1. After that, the prediction tree attempts to make 
a new prediction, but using a shorter pattern. This will be repeated until the HD metric 
reaches 0. We analyze this approach with and without a confidence mechanism.   

Finally,  we  quantify  the  repetition  of  TCI  over  time,  in  order  to  help  understand 
predictability and prediction opportunity limits of this proposal. In one side, we determine 
the maximum prediction accuracy that these flavors of the HBP approach can 
reach,  by  counting  if  a  certain  TCI  packet  has  ever  appeared  in  the  past.  If  it  has   
appeared  once,  we  assume  that  it  could  be  correctly  predicted.  Moreover,  we  also 

 

 

Using a History-Based Approach to Predict Topology Control Information 

241 

quantify  the  incorrect  prediction  of  a  pattern  for  each  particular  HD  that  could  be 
correctly predicted as the correct prediction was in the list of control packets related 
to that pattern. Therefore, this information can help us identify the limits of the HBP 
approach, and also determine how far a particular prediction approach is from the best 
prediction  performance.  On  the  other  side,  this  article  also  analyzes  the  representativeness 
of the  most-frequent packets, respect to  whole set of packets received by a 
node over time. This will give us a first understanding about how difficult is to make 
right predictions, and which is the amount of data (historical information) that must 
be tracked to make these predictions.   

3 

Experimental Framework 

In order to determine the performance of the HBP approach, we designed and simulated 
several interaction scenarios using the NS-3 simulator [17]. This tool allowed us 
to model these scenarios, collect statistics, define initial network topologies, configure 
wireless network interfaces, and set the mobility-patterns of the nodes. Every simulation 
performed in this study lasted 14,400 seconds (4 hours).   

In these simulations we used the Optimized Link State Routing (OLSR) protocol, 
which  is  a  well-known  protocol  for  routing  messages  in  ad-hoc  networks  [5].  The 
nodes of these networks periodically exchange control information to maintain a local 
map  of  the  network  topology.  In  order  to  do  that,  OLSR  uses  two  types  of  control 
messages:  HELLO  and  Topology  Control  (TC).  HELLO  messages  allow  a  node  to 
discover  its  neighbors,  and  determine  the  quality  of  the  links  between  them.  TC   
messages allow a  node to disseminate topology information  with its neighbors. The 
simulations considered the delivery of a HELLO message every 2 seconds, and a TC 
message every 3 seconds.   

The  physical  place  available  for  interactions  was  a  square  open  area  of  300×300 
meters,  that  could  represent  a  beach  or  a  park,  where  people  are  free  to  move 
throughout the  whole space, and eventually interact  with  other people (e.g., friends, 
relatives,  or  service  providers).  In  these  scenarios,  the  people  can  remain  stationary 
(e.g. during a picnic), or walking with or without a clear direction. A mobile collaborative 
application, that detects the presence of related people in a physical area, can be 
eventually used to promote face-to-face encounters among them, as proposed in [18].   
The  simulations  considered  devices  using  Wi-Fi  to  detect  other  nodes,  and  exchange 
 control  information  among  them.  Using  these  interfaces,  mobile  networks 
composed  of  10,  20,  30,  and  40  nodes  were  simulated.  The  nodes  were  randomly 
deployed in the open area, and their behavior alternate between some stationary periods,
  and  others  in  which  they  move  up  to  1  m/s  (walking),  2  m/s  (trotting),  4  m/s 
(running), and 6 m/s (bicycling). 

The  node  movements  can  follow  one  of  the  following  mobility  models:  Random 
Walk, Nomadic, or Self-similar Least Action Walk (SLAW) [19, 20]. These mobility 
models are quite representative of the movement patterns of a person or a group that 
performs  outdoor  activities.  The  node  mobility  was  implemented  using  the 
BonnMotion  simulator  [21].  The  Random  Walk  model  considers  people  moving   

 

242 

P. Millán et al. 

randomly in terms of direction and speed within a certain area; e.g. people in a park, 
where each person can move via walking, running, or riding a bicycle without using 
formal paths. The Nomadic model considers people moving in groups, from one location 
to another. This is representative of guided tours, e.g. at a city downtown. This 
model considers a particular  node per group (i.e., a reference  node) that determines 
the next target point to be visited, and also a reference path and speed to reach such a 
place. This role can be played by the tour guide. Finally, in the SLAW model people 
move quite randomly, but they consider their previous movements (speed and direc-
tion) to determine the new ones. This is similar to the movements of people that use 
the walking paths in a park. This model is also effective to model casual encounters 
among community  members; e.g., students at the  university campus, or friends in a 
theme  park.  Unlike  other  models,  the  speed  in  this  model  cannot  be  parameterized, 
and it assumes a default value of 1 m/s (walking speed). 

Finally,  we  have  assumed  that  all  nodes  are  similar,  and  their  capabilities  are 
equivalent  to  an  iPhone  4.  These  devices  have  an  effective  WiFi  range  of  approximately 
 80  meters  in  open  areas.  In  such  range,  we  can  expect  quite  stable  ad-hoc 
communication among devices, and a bandwidth of at least of 50 Kbps, which is appropriate 
to support reliable interactions among mobile nodes. 

4 

Analysis of Obtained Results 

4.1 

Predictability Limits 

In  order  to  determine  the  upper-bound  limit  achievable  by  the  HBP  approach,  we 
have assumed unbounded memory for the nodes, and also tracking if a TCI packet has 
ever appeared in the past. Figure 1 shows how the three mobility models behave when 
considering several nodes densities (from 10 to 40 nodes) and a similar average mobility 
speed (1 m/s) for the nodes in every model. Notice that for the scenario with 10 
nodes, about 80% of the times the control packet to be predicted has already appeared 
in the past. This upper-bound limit is extremely high; therefore, the potential of predicting 
correctly the TCI is also high. 

Fig. 1. Predictability limits 

 

 

 

Using a History-Based Approach to Predict Topology Control Information 

243 

Besides that, we can see that there are no significant differences among the prediction 
capability in the three  mobility  models. This  would indicate that  the prediction 
capability of the HBP approach does not depend on the mobility model being used by 
the nodes. In fact, we could expect similar results even in scenarios where the nodes 
use several mobility patterns.   

The results also show that the prediction limits decreases when increases the node 
density. This is a result that can be expected, since a high-density network has many 
communication  links  that  need  to  be  correctly  predicted;  therefore,  an  important 
amount of control packets must delivered through the network, and a fewer number of 
patterns (in percentage) are identifiable by the nodes.   

In order to determine the role that the speed of nodes is playing in the obtained results,
 we established maximum speeds to the nodes. The nodes can randomly assume 
a certain speed (1 m/s, 2 m/s, 4 m/s, or 6 m/s) for a short time period, and then make a 
new assumption for the next period. The obtained results have shown that the nodes’ 
speed does not affect the prediction upper-bound limit of the HBP approach. Therefore,
 we can say that this limit always ranges between 50% and 80%. Moreover, the 
predictability limit decreases when the node density increases, and there is not a significant 
difference among the mobility models used by the nodes. 

4.2 

Frequency of the Observed Control Packets 

Concerning the control packets that appear most frequently in the history kept by the 
nodes, Figure 2 shows a curve illustrating the results. The curve considers, from left 
to right, the most frequent packets. The X-axis indicates (in percentage) the number of 
different packets that appear more frequently, respect to the total number of observed 
packets (i.e. packets that were recorded in the historical information of the nodes). For 
instance, in the scenario with 30 nodes, there are a 30% of different the control packets 
that represent 70% of the (total) observed packets. Notice that Y-axis and X-axis 
are both normalized.   

Fig. 2. Frequency of the observed control packets 

 

 

244 

P. Millán et al. 

The most important result shown in Figure 2 is that there is a small subset of packets 
 that  are  representative  of  most  packets  delivered  by  the  nodes  through  the  network.
 In other words, the control packets belonging to this small subset traverse the 
network many times, therefore they have high representativeness. Although it seems 
that the combination of multiple nodes will produce a huge number of possibilities, in 
reality only  with a few number of packets  we can obtain most of the packets that a 
network produces. Notice that this result does not depend on the node density in the 
network.   

Although the values shown in Figure 2 were obtained considering a SLAW mobility 
model, and a speed of 1 m/s, the simulations done using the other mobility models 
have shown the same distribution for the results. Summarizing, these results and the 
predictability  limits  shown  by  the  HBP  approach  are  highly  encouraging,  as  it  provides 
many opportunities for predicting TCI packets, and these predictions would be 
focused on a small subset of the total packets delivered through the network. 

4.3  History-Based Prediction 

In order to perform a more comprehensive evaluation of the prediction performance, 
we  have  used  several  flavors  of  the  HBP  prediction  approach.  Moreover,  we  have 
identified four typical cases to analyze when making a prediction: (1) nopred, (2) hit, 
(3)  missNoPred,  and  (4)  missPred.  In  the  first  case  (nopred),  there  is  no  prediction 
because there was no table entry that matches the current pattern. This would be the 
case with the lowest occurrence probably, as it only occurs the first time that a pattern 
appears. The second case (hit) means that there is a prediction (i.e., the pattern is in 
the table) and it is correct (i.e., the packet associated to that entry is the next expected 
packet).  The  third  case  (missNoPred)  means  that  there  is  a  prediction,  and  it  is  not 
correct,  but  it  is  impossible  to  do  a  correct  prediction,  as  the  next  expected  packet 
never appeared in the past with that pattern. Finally, the fourth case (missPred) means 
that there is a prediction, and it is not correct, however the packet could be correctly 
predicted, as the next expected packet appeared with that pattern at least once in the 
past.   

Fig. 3. History-based prediction using a SLAW mobility model and last value policy 

 

 

 

Using a History-Based Approach to Predict Topology Control Information 

245 

Figure 3 shows the HBP performance considering these prediction cases in a scenario 
 with  a  SLAW  mobility,  and  node  density  ranging  from  10  to  40  nodes.  The 
HBP  approach  assumes  the  last-value  policy  as  the  selected  prediction  mechanism, 
and a HD in the range from 0 to 3. 

These results indicate that the largest percentages of hits are achieved with HD=0, 
but  these  cases  also  present  important  percentages  of  misses  (i.e.  missPred  and 
missNoPred).  The  results  also  show  the  effects  of  the  predictability  limits  (already 
seen in Figure 1), which reduces the number of hits and misses when the node density 
increases.  The  equivalence  of  missNoPred  (HD=0)  and  noPred  (HD=1)  can  be  explained 
because for HD=1 the mechanism cannot predict the first time that a packet 
appears; i.e., this is missNoPred for HD=0. 

Figure 4 shows the effect of using different prediction policies with a SLAW mobility 
model, for a network with 10 nodes. For this analysis we have considered three 
different sizes of history windows, corresponding to 1, 2, and 3 rounds of TCI delivery 
(X-axis). These windows sizes establish the amount of historical information used 
to identify the patterns.   

 
Fig. 4. History-based prediction using different prediction policies   

When  using  pure  Random  policy  it  is  always  possible  to  make  a  prediction  (even 
without history information), but  most predictions are missPred. The use of historical 
information clearly allows achieving better results, even using a history-based Random 
strategy.  This  can  be  considered  as  the  baseline,  and  demonstrates  the  importance  of 
utilizing the historical information to make more and accurate predictions. 

Finally, Figure 5 shows the effect of using different mobility models with a speed 
of  1  m/s,  for  a  network  with  10  nodes.  For  this  analysis  we  have  considered  three 
different sizes of history windows (1, 2, and 3). We can observe that the behavior of 
the 3 mobility models is quite similar (less than a 10% of difference), with a significant 
increase in noPred cases for large history values. These results confirm that there 
are  no  significant  differences  among  the  prediction  capability  in  the  three  mobility 
models, as outlined in the analysis of predictability limits. 

 

246 

P. Millán et al. 

Fig. 5. History-based prediction using different mobility-models   

 

4.4  History-Based Prediction Using a Confidence Mechanism 

Notice also that in all the analyzed approaches a prediction is always done (besides 
the noPred case), and this prediction can be a hit or a miss. In the case of a hit, the 
direct benefit is a reduction of the network traffic and energy consumption, due to the 
producer will not send the control packet through the network, and the consumer will 
assume  that  its  predicted  control  packet  is  correct.  However,  every  miss  prediction 
has a cost for the nodes, since the producer will detect that the prediction is not correct 
(due it has the current packet, and this packet does not correspond to the one that 
returns  the  predictor). Therefore,  this  node  will  send  the  correct  packet  through  the 
network. Meanwhile, the consumer will assume an incorrect prediction, as long as the 
correct packet does not arrive to the consumer node. This elapsed time would not be 
long, but it could be long enough to route some data packets, assuming a low accuracy 
of the network topology map. Therefore, the challenge to address is to always predict 
in certainty scenarios, and do not predict in other cases.   

This strategy can be implemented by including a  mechanism that adds two  more 
cases to the previous four. Now a prediction is made if the predictor has enough confidence.
  In  other  case,  the  prediction  would  be  a  hit  (noConfidence/hit)  or  a  miss 
(noConfidence/miss).  Our  aim  is  to  maximize  noConfidence/miss  with  a  minimum 
noConfidence/hit. Figure 6 shows the behavior of this confidence mechanism, considering 
 the  6  cases  (four  of  them  consider  no  confidence).  The  results  were  obtained 
using a Nomadic mobility model, in a network with 10 nodes, which had a maximum 
speed of 1 m/s. A last-value strategy was chosen to perform the predictions.   

The results indicate that there are few predictions when using confidence; however, 
most of them are hits, and there are few misses (the miss ratio is minimized). On the 
other hand, the most of the predictions were not made because there were not enough 
confidence (noConfidence/miss with little noConfidence/hit). This indicates that using 
a confidence mechanism we can minimize prediction errors. 

 

 

Using a History-Based Approach to Predict Topology Control Information 

247 

 
Fig. 6. History-based prediction using a 2-bit confidence-mechanism 

4.5  Dynamic History-Depth 

With the aim of improving the total number of hits, we relaxed the condition of fixed 
history-depth  patterns,  in  order  to  have  more  opportunities  to  correctly  predict  the 
next  TCI  packet.  When  a  pattern  has  no  previous  history  and/or  not  enough  confidence,
 we decrease in 1 the history depth, and we check again if a prediction can be 
made (with the same selection policy), as a way to minimize noPred cases. We call 
this method Dynamic History-Depth (or Tree).   

Fig. 7. Fixed History-Depth versus Dynamic History-Depth (Tree) 

 

Figure 7 shows the results of using Fixed versus Dynamic History-Depth with and 
without confidence (using SLAW mobility, 10 nodes, 5 as maximum HD, maximum 
speed 1 m/s, and the last-value policy). We can see that the Tree method minimizes 
noPred. Therefore, for the same percentage of hits, the total number of hits increases 
significantly.  When  we  include  a  confidence  mechanism  (right  side  of  Figure  7), 
Fixed History-Depth shows a decrease in number of hits and misses. However, Tree 
with Confidence achieves better results, maximizing hits and minimizing misses.   

 

248 

P. Millán et al. 

5 

Conclusions and Future Work 

In this work, we have analyzed the performance of a history-based strategy for predicting 
the topology control information generated by routing protocols for mobile ad 
hoc  and  opportunistic  networks.  This  analysis  was  done  simulating  several  mobile 
collaboration scenarios. The obtained results indicate that the history-based prediction 
(HBP) strategy contributes to reduce the traffic on these networks, and saves energy 
in the mobile devices supporting mobile collaborative activities. 

First, we have observed that around 80% of the times, for low densities of nodes, a 
packet has already appeared in the past. This percentage falls to 50% when considering 
 a  network  with  a  higher  node  density.  This  demonstrates  that  the  upper  bound 
limits of the HBP strategy remain high for an ample variety of interaction scenarios, 
which make us expecting important benefits for mobile collaborative applications that 
use these networks as communication support. Second, the results also show that few 
packets  contribute  significantly  to  the  total  percentage  of  packets  delivered  through 
the network. This means that there is a high opportunity for predicting the TCI, and 
this prediction can be just focused on a small subset of packets. Finally, we have identified 
 the  role  played  by  different  history-depth  patterns,  prediction  policies,  confidence 
mechanisms, and the combination of several approaches at the same time after 
analyzing the behavior of history-based prediction mechanisms under several scenarios.
  Considering  all  these  issues  and  a  worst-case  scenario  (with  high  density  of 
nodes), we can correctly predict at least 30% of the control packets, minimizing the 
percentage of errors and getting an upper-bound limit of predictions that  is close to 
50% in such an scenario.   

As a future work, we plan to analyze in detail all combinations of work scenarios, 
considering node density, speed, and mobility patterns. We also want to develop more 
complex  confidence  mechanisms,  and  combine  the  prediction  approaches  to  see  if 
their benefits can be accumulated. Moreover, it would also be interesting to analyze in 
a next step the prediction performance in opportunistic networks involving heterogeneous 
environments, like those presented by Li et al. [22]. Addressing these scenarios 
will allow developers to address IoT-based solutions.   

 

Acknowledgments. This work has been partially supported by the Spanish Ministry 
of  Science  and  Innovation  (MCI)  and  FEDER  funds  of  the  EU  under  the  contracts 
TIN2013-44375-R,  TIN2013-47245-C2-1-R,  TIN2013-47245-C2-2-R  and  TIN2012-
37171-C02-02,  and  also  the  Community  Networks  Testbed  for  the  Future  Internet 
(CONFINE) Large-scale Integrating Project: FP7-288535, and also by the Generalitat 
de  Catalunya  as  a  Consolidated  Research  Group  2014-SGR-881,  and  also  by 
Fondecyt (Chile), Grant No 1120207. 

References 

1.  Spyropoulos, T., et al.: Routing for Disruption Tolerant Networks: Taxonomy and Design. 

Wireless Networks 16(8) (2010) 

2.  Zeng, Y., et al.: Directional Routing and Scheduling for Green Vehicular Delay Tolerant 

Networks. Wireless Networks 19(2) (2013) 

 

 

Using a History-Based Approach to Predict Topology Control Information 

249 

3.  Vasilakos,  A.,  et  al.:  Delay  Tolerant  Networks:  Protocols  and  Applications.  CRC  Press 

(2012) 

4.  Youssef, M., et al.: Routing Metrics of Cognitive Radio Networks: A Survey. IEEE Communications 
Surveys and Tutorials 16(1) (2014) 

5.  Clausen, T., Jacquet, P.: Optimized Link State Routing Protocol (OLSR). IETF RFC 3626 

(October 2003) 

6.  Medina,  E.,  Meseguer,  R.,  Molina,  C.,  Royo,  D.:  OLSRp:  Predicting  Control  Information   
to  Achieve  Scalability  in  OLSR  Ad  Hoc  Networks.  In:  Pentikousis,  K.,  Agüero,  R.,   
García-Arranz, M., Papavassiliou, S. (eds.) MONAMI 2010. LNICST, vol. 68, pp. 225–236. 
Springer, Heidelberg (2011) 

7.  Meseguer,  R.,  et  al.:  Reducing  Energy  Consumption  in  Human-Centric  Wireless  Sensor 

Networks. In: Procs. IEEE Int. Conf. on Systems, Man, & Cybernetics (October 2012) 

8.  Meseguer, R., et al.: Energy-Aware Topology Control Strategy for Human-Centric Wireless 
Sensor Networks. Sensors Journal 14 (February 2014) 

9.  Maleki, M., Dantu, K., Pedram, M.: Lifetime Prediction Routing in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks.
 In: Wireless Communication& Networking, pp. 1185–1190. IEEE Press (2003) 

10.  Kim, D., et al.: Routing Mechanisms for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks Based on the Energy 

Drain Rate. IEEE Trans. on Mobile Computing (April 2003) 

11.  Chen, B., et al.: Span: An Energy-Efficient Coordination Algorithm for Topology Maintenance 
in Ad Hoc Wireless Networks. Journal of Wireless Networks 5 (2002) 

12.  Ye,  F.,  et  al.:  Peas:  A  Robust  Energy  Conserving  Protocol  for  Long-Lived  Sensor  Networks.
 In: Proc. of the 23rd Int. Conf. on Distributed Computing Systems (May 2003) 

13.  De Rosa, F., et al.: Disconnection Prediction in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks for Supporting 

Cooperative Work. IEEE Pervasive Computing (2005) 

14.  Su,  W.,  Lee,  S.J.,  Gerla,  M.:  Mobility  Prediction  and  Routing  in  Ad  Hoc  Wireless  Networks.
 International Journal of Network Management 11 (2001) 

15.  Millan, P., et al.: Tracking and Predicting Link Quality in Wireless Community Networks. 

Tech. Report UPC-DAC-RR-2014-10. DAC-UPC, Spain (June 2014) 

16.  Koksal, C.E., Balakrishnan, H.: Quality-Aware Routing Metrics for Time-Varying Wireless 
Mesh Networks. J. Selected Areas in Communications (2006) 
17.  NS-3, A Discrete-Event Network Simulator for Internet Systems,   

http://www.nsnam.org/ 

18.  Vergara, C., Ochoa, S.F., Gutierrez, F., Rodriguez-Covili, J.: Extending social networking 
services toward a physical interaction scenario. In: Bravo, J., López-de-Ipiña, D., Moya, F. 
(eds.) UCAmI 2012. LNCS, vol. 7656, pp. 208–215. Springer, Heidelberg (2012) 

19.  Camp, T., Boleng, J., Davies, V.: A Survey of Mobility Models for Ad Hoc Network Research.
 Wirel. Commun. Mob. Comput. (2002) 

20.  Lee, K., Hong, S., Kim, S.J., Rhee, I., Chong, S.: Slaw: A New Mobility Model for Human 

Walks. In: Proceedings of INFOCOM 2009 (April 2009) 

21.  Aschenbruck, N., et al.: BonnMotion: A Mobility Scenario Generation and Analysis Tool. 

In: Procs. 3rd Int. ICST Conf. Simulation Tools & Techniques (March 2010) 

22.  Fu, X., Li, W., Fortino, G.: A utility-oriented routing algorithm for community based opportunistic 
networks. In: Proc. of the 2013 IEEE 17th International Conference on Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work in Design (CSCWD 2013), June 27-29, pp. 675–680 
(2013) 

 

 

