 

Mobile and Context-Aware Grocery Shopping  

to Promote Active Aging  

Netzahualcoyotl Hernández1, Carlos Refugio1, Monica Tentori1, Jesus Favela1,  

and Sergio Ochoa2 

1 Computer Science Department, CICESE Research Center, Ensenada, México 

2 Computer Science Department, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile 

{hcruz,hflores,mtentori,favela}@cicese.mx,  

sochoa@dd.uchile.cl 

Abstract.  Active  aging  aims  at  promoting  physical  activity,  socialization  and 
participation in society as a mechanism to improve physical and mental health. 
We  explore  the  use  of  a  mobile,  context-aware  application  to  help  elders 
transform  their  grocery  shopping  experience  into  an  activity  that  promotes 
active aging. We describe the design and formative evaluation of WaSSAA, a 
mobile  application  to  persuade  elders  to  exercise  and  socialize  while  sharing 
grocery  prices  and  promoting  “smart”  grocery  shopping.  WaSSAA  uses 
location information to promote social encounters and to ask shoppers to gather 
price  information  for  fellow  users,  and  the  accelerometer  to  estimate  physical 
activity and reward its user. Results of a formative evaluation of the usefulness 
of WaSSAA with 16 elders shows that older adults are aware and sensitive to 
grocery  prices  and  find  the  application  useful  to  guide  them  when  comparing 
prices during grocery shopping. They also perceive grocery shopping as a social 
activity and welcome WaSSAA’s services to encourage in-person encounters.  

Keywords: Active aging, Price sensitivity, Grocery shopping, Social shopping. 

1 

Introduction 

Research  in  Ambient  Assisted  Living  (AAL)  has  focused  on  developing  intelligent 
environments that can assist  older adults and people with  disabilities to compensate 
their functional limitations to complete activities of daily living [1]. As stated by the 
Active  Ageing  policy  framework,  AAL  should  extend  its  scope  beyond  caring  for 
people with disability to prevention and wellness management [2]. 

Active aging aims at promoting social participation and health in order to enhance 
our quality of life as we age. Its objective is to preserve the physical and mental health 
of individuals by keeping them physically and socially active, and by promoting their 
social,  economic,  and  cultural  participation  in  the  community  [3].  Active  aging 
changes  the  way  we  conceive  the  relation  between  aging  and  health.  Rather  than 
looking at older adults as individuals with deteriorating health, it aims at maintaining 
their physical and mental health trough the adoption of healthy habits and behaviors.  
Our aim is to design technology that encourages older adults to exercise, socialize, 
and actively participate in their communities. We decided to focus our attention in an 
activity  that  most  adults  perform  regularly,  that  has  an  important  social  component 
and which involves walking, a kind of physical activity that physicians recommend to 

C. Nugent, A. Coronato, and J. Bravo (Eds.): IWAAL 2013, LNCS 8277, pp. 71–79, 2013. 
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2013 

72 

N. Hernández et al. 

older adults due to its effectiveness and simplicity. The activity we selected is grocery 
shopping. Grocery shopping is an Instrumental Activity of Daily Living (IADL), thus 
it is associated to independent living [4]. It is an activity  usually performed several 
times a week, which takes a considerable amount of time. It involves some degree of 
physical exercise, particularly when the person has to walk more than a few blocks to 
go shopping. The activity also has a social component, it requires the interaction with 
other people, and older adults often go with someone else to the grocery store.  

We  aim  to  promote  physical  exercise,  socialization,  and  community  engagement 
by  promoting  older  adults  to  do  “smart”  grocery  shopping  and  save  money  while 
doing this. There is evidence in the literature that older adults tend to be aware of the 
price of groceries and sensitive to its fluctuations [5]. Thus, they might be willing to 
walk a bit more if they can save. In addition, we could motivate them to walk to the 
store in order to collect price information that could be used by fellow shoppers, thus 
helping them contribute to their community.  

There  are  applications  that  provide  some  of  the  services  we  just  described,  for 
example  LiveCompare  [6]  provides  services  to  identify  the  most  economic  grocery 
store,  and  iGrocery  [7]  additionally  provides  nutrition  information.  However,  apps 
like  LiveCompare,  iGrocery,  and  GroceryiQ  [8]  limited  their  services  to  store 
shopping  lists  without  providing  information  about  social  interaction  opportunity 
when shopping, providing a partial solution to the issues of socialization and health 
care that have emerged in the research conducted in this study. 

This paper reports a qualitative study (section 2) to inform the design (section 3) of 
a mobile and context-aware application for active aging supporting grocery shopping 
(section 4); and results of 3 focus groups conducted in 3 different countries to validate 
our design and gather further insights of its utility and adoption (section 5). 

Understanding the Shopping Practices of Older Adults 

2 
For 3 months, we conducted a qualitative study to understand older adults shopping 
strategies.  We  conducted  5  semi-structured  interviews  for  an  average  of  around  44 
minutes each, with 5 older adults. We complemented our interviews with 3 hours of 
passive observation of older adults in two naturalistic conditions: (1) exercising in a 
park  and  in  a  social  welfare  group,  and  (2)  shopping  groceries  at  a  major  grocery 
store.  We  used  affinity  diagramming  and  techniques  to  derive  axial  coding  from 
grounded theory to analyze all the transcribed interviews and observations [9]. 

We  found  that  our  informants  are  quite  sensitive  to  grocery  prices,  which  is 
consistent with findings reported in the literature [10-12]. Price was their main criteria 
in  deciding  where  to  shop,  with  distance  to  the  shop  being  second.  All  informants 
reported using a memory aid to assist their shopping, mostly in the form of a grocery 
list.  They  are  also  aware  of  discounts  and  offers,  information  they  gather  from  TV 
ads,  publicity  in  the  supermarkets  and  friends.  Our  informants  usually  walk  to  the 
store  unless  they  have  to  go  far  or  return  with  many  groceries,  in  which  case  they 
drove  or  took  a  taxi  back  home.  When  accompanied  by  a  friend  or  family  member 
they usually took more time shopping and walking around in the store. 

Designing a Grocery Shopping Application for Active Aging 

3 
Following an interactive user-centered design methodology we used the results of the 
qualitative  study  to  iteratively  design  a  low-fidelity  prototype  of  a  mobile  grocery 

 

 

Mobile and Context-Aware Grocery Shopping to Promote Active Aging 

73 

shopping  application.  The  design  of  the  prototype  was  discussed  during  several 
design sessions, in two of which, one of the informants participated. 

Our  approach  relies  on  using  mobile  technologies  and  pervasive  sensing  as 
constructs to transform the activity of grocery shopping into an engaging activity to 
promote  active  aging.  With  the  system  an  older  adult  may  exercise  and  socialize 
while shopping for groceries. The system should address the following requirements: 
•  Provide  means  to  easily  consult  and  edit  a  grocery  list.  Older  adults  use 

grocery lists as an aid to plan their grocery shopping.  

•  Enable  context-aware  grocery  store  suggestions.  We  found  out  older  adults 
decisions to where to go for grocery shopping are context sensitive. Therefore a 
system should take advantage of the relevant context based on distance, cost, and 
the amount of items to carry, so older adults could make an informed decision. 

•  Motivate  and  ease  the  capture  of  food  prices  and  recommendations  with 
minimal effort from older adults. Older adults could capture recommendations 
to benefit others and the system should provide incentives to share food prices. 

•  Promote  exercising  and  socialization.  As  exercising  and  socialization  are  key 
features  for  active  aging  the  system  should  enable  the  automatic  recognition  of 
the amount of physical activity performed by the user and monitor the location of 
friends to timely suggest a user when to socialize and exercise. 

To  show  how  WaSSAA  (Walk,  Save,  and  Share  for  Active  Aging)  could  be  used 
when shopping groceries we present a scenario of the use of the system. 

Miguel is 72 years-old; he is retired and lives alone since his wife died two years ago. After 
breakfast he updates his grocery list using WaSSAA on his smartphone (Figure 2 left). He then 
looks at the alternatives WaSSAA presents to him as grocery shopping plans. This information 
includes the different markets in the vicinity Miguel could visit, the potential cost of buying the 
items  in  his  grocery  list  at  each  market,  and  how  much  exercise  he  could  potentially  do  by 
walking towards each market (Figure 2 middle). Miguel uses this information to decide to go to 
market ABC, which has the lowest total cost for the items in his shopping list. He selects this 
option,  indicating  that  he  is  planning  to  walk  to  the  store  in  approximately  15  minutes. 
WaSSAA  notifies  Miguel’s  grocery  shopping  plan  to  his  friends.  Alejandro,  a  neighbor  and 
friend of Miguel sees this message and decides to join Miguel. Alejandro uses WaSSAA to send 
a message notifying Miguel he will be at his home in about 10 minutes to accompany him to the 
store. They both walk to the store talking about the soccer match of the night before. Once in 
the store, WaSSAA notifies them both that they have received an award for walking 7 blocks, 
and an invitation to capture the current price of two products in that store: apples and milk. 
Knowing  that  providing  this  information  will  give  them  points  they  can  later  redeem  for 
products  in  the  store,  they  decide  to  capture  the  prices  using  WaSSAA.  When  walking  back 
home they pass in front of their friend’s Carmen home, WaSSAA notifies Carmen that Miguel 
and Alejandro are nearby and she comes out to greet them. 

4  Walk, Save and Share for Active Aging: The WaSSAA App 

The design of WaSSAA is based on a three-tier client-server architecture (Fig. 1). The 
data  layer  records  information  about  users,  groceries,  prices,  and  rewards  in  a 

 

74 

N. Hernández et al. 

relational database. The business layer includes the application logic, such as creating 
recommendations for grocery shopping and deciding what product prices might need 
to  be  updated.  Both  these  layers  are  executed  in  the  WaSSAA  server.  Finally,  the 
presentation  layer  runs  in  the  mobile  phone  and  displays  recommendations,  the 
shopping list, and rewards to the user. We next describe the WaSSAA components. 

Fig. 1. Architecture of WaSSAA 

 

WaSSAA Mobile Client 

Grocery List. The user uses this module to update his shopping list. This can be done 
directly on the mobile device or through a web page, thus allowing other household 
members  to  add  items  to  the  shopping  list.  The  recommendation  module  uses  this 
information to present the user with shopping alternatives and suggestions.   

Price  Collector. This  component  implements  two  alternative  mechanisms  to  gather 
price information using the mobile device: (1) voice command when activated records 
audio that is interpreted using the Google Speech API; and (2) typing text that allows 
the user to capture the price of the product by directly typing the amount. 

The  price  information  captured  by  the  user  is  stored  in  the  server.  A  tuple: 
{product, price, confidence} is stored in the database. The Confidence is a value from 
1  to  5,  calculated  from  the  reliability  of  the  user,  determined  based  on  its  history 
record, variations in prices reported and how recently was the price updated. When a 
user captures a new price, his rewards are updated in the database.  

Rewards  Module.  It  is  used  to  inform  the  user  of  the  rewards  he  has  obtained  by 
capturing prices using the application. It keeps information about the number of users 
who have used prices updated by this user. 

Activity  Monitor.  This  component  uses  the  accelerometer  in  the  smartphone  to 
estimate  number  of  steps  the  older  adult  walks,  giving  him  rewards  when  reaching 
certain thresholds. 

 

 

Mobile and Context-Aware Grocery Shopping to Promote Active Aging 

75 

Socialization  Module.  It  is  used  to  inform  the  user  of  opportunities  for  social 
encounters with the user’s social network. When the user consults this information, a 
query is formulated to the Match meeting component in the server. 

WaSSAA Server 

Recommendation  Module.  This  component  locates  stores  in  the  vicinity  and  uses 
distance to the home of the user, and price information to generate a list of alternative 
shopping  plans.  The  module  uses  the  Foursquare  API  to  locate  relevant  stores. 
Shopping plans are sent to the mobile device and presented as alternatives to the user.  

Database.  It  uses  a  relational  database  to  record  information  about  users,  products, 
prices and rewards.   

4.1  Using WaSSAA  

To show how the components of the architecture interact among them, we revisit the 
scenario described in Section 3. Miguel regularly opens the mobile app to update his 
shopping  list  (Figure  2a).  When  he  plans  to  go  shopping  he  selects  the  option  that 
brings him the alternative sites with the total cost and approximate amount of walking 
involved  in  shopping  at  each  site  (Figure  2b).  To  provide  this  information  the  app 
uses the Foursquare API to consult grocery stores in the vicinity and the database of 
products and prices stored in the server. Once Miguel selects the alternative he plans 
to follow the system asks him if he wants to notify his friends that he is planning to go 
shopping and if this is the case to indicate the approximate time when he is planning 
to leave (now; in 15mins; in 30mins; in 1hour). In this case Miguel indicates that he 
plans  to  go  shopping  in  15  minutes  and  the  friends  he  wants  the  system  to  notify 
(Figure  2c).  Alejandro  receives  this  message  and  WaSSAA  allows  him  to  notify 
Miguel that he will go to his house for both of them to walk together to the store. 

 

a) 

 

b) 

 

c) 

Fig. 2. The WaSSAA mobile app: a. Grocery shopping list; b. Alternative markets to shop with 
price and exercise information; c. Notifying friends of a trip to the shop. 

 

76 

N. Hernández et al. 

When the users approach the store WaSSAA automatically checks-in for them in 
Foursqure. Aware of their location, the system asks them to collect prices of certain 
products. Finally, the system rewards Miguel and Alejandro for the prices they have 
collected and the amount of physical exercise they made by walking to the store. 

5 

Formative Evaluation of WaSSAA 

Three focus group sessions with older adults where conducted to evaluate WaSSAA. 
We aimed at validating the assumptions behind the design of WaSSAA, its utility and 
ease of use. The protocol for the focus group included 34 semi-structured questions 
and two scenarios one illustrating the use of WaSSAA (as described above), and the 
same situation without the system. The sessions lasted about 90 minutes. 

The  questionnaire  had  5  sections:  Incentives  (habits  and  motivation);  Exercising 
(frequency  of  physical  activity);  Grocery  shopping  (routines,  price  sensitivity, 
transportation); Technology use (use of smartphones and the WaSSAA app). 

A total of 16 older adults participated in the focus group sessions, with an average 
age of 71. Participants reported having the habit of shopping, no difficulty walking, 
experience  using  smartphones  more  than  6  months,  and  no  problems  reading  and 
understanding  smartphones’  notifications.  As  shown  in  Table  1,  the  focus  groups 
where conducted in three different Spanish-speaking countries, one in a small city, a 
second one in a medium-size city and the third one in a large city. This was done to 
validate  our  design  across  different  demographics  and  conditions,  and  to  identify 
differences in the way in which our informants perceived the utility of the application.  

Table 1. Focus group sessions to evaluate WaSSAA 

 

Focus group A 

Focus group B 

Focus group C 

No. of participants 
City, Country 
Size of the city  
Gender  
Average age (S.D) 

5 

6 

Bolivar, Argentina 

Small (30k) 

(2 male; 3 female) 

74.2 (2.22) 

Ensenada, Mexico 
Medium (500k) 
(1 male; 5 female) 

65 (2.94) 

5 

Santiago, Chile 
Large (5,000k) 

(2 male; 3 female) 

73.8 (7.35) 

 

We  organized  our  results  in  three  sections  according  to  the  organization  of  the 
focus group session. We first explored the strategies the participants used for grocery 
shopping, their awareness and sensitivity to price, and their awareness of the need to 
perform  physical  activity  and  weather  they  exercised  regularly  or  not.  The  second 
topic relates to their perceived utility of the WaSSAA application and  whether they 
found it easy to use. We used scenarios and screenshots to motivate the discussion on 
this  topic.  They  were  asked  to  put  themselves  in  the  position  of  the  person  in  the 
scenario, to interpret the information provided by the system and decision they would 
make  in  such  scenarios.  Finally,  we  explored  issues  related  to  socialization  and  the 
various ways in which the participants perceived grocery shopping as a social activity.  

 

 

Mobile and Context-Aware Grocery Shopping to Promote Active Aging 

77 

5.1 

Price Awareness and Sensitivity 

All the participants divide their grocery shopping in one major shopping trip that is 
made once every one to four weeks, with more frequent trips (daily in many cases), 
mostly  to  shop  for  perishable  food  items  such  as  fruit  or  bread.  It  was  common 
practice to go to a larger market for the main shopping and to local markets for the 
more frequent trips. They would usually drive or take a taxi for the major shopping 
trip.  In  both,  group  B  and  C,  the  main  buying  criteria  was  to  obtain  good  quality 
products at the best price possible. They were well aware of the prices of the products 
they regularly buy and tend to compare prices and be aware of discounts  mostly  to 
advertisement and comments from friends.  

"I  go  to  the  street  market  because  the  fruit  and  vegetables  are  fresh  and  very  cheap, 
sometimes the tomato costs 5 or 6 pesos, the strawberry at 15 pesos and 1 kilo of cucumber for 
10 pesos” (Participant, Group B). 

In  contrast,  the  participants  in  group  A  emphasized  the  social  aspect  of  grocery 
shopping.  They  normally  shop  in  the  same  place  and  were  unaware  of  price 
differences.  They  are  friends  with  the  owners  of  the  markets  they  visit,  and  keep 
shopping there out of solidarity with these small shops, and because they appreciate 
the  social  interaction  involved  in  grocery  shopping.  In  addition,  the  owners  and 
employees know them well and offer them the products they know they like.  

“They  have  the brands  I  buy,  the  cashiers  are  very  polite,  it is nearby,  the butcher  is  my 

friend, the owners live in the town” (Participant, Group A). 

All participants agreed that if the cost of a product increases sharply they will look 
for  cheaper  alternatives  or  even  stop  buying  the  product  altogether.  Thus,  they  are 
clearly sensitive to price.  

All participants were aware of the importance of performing physical exercise for 
their  health,  yet  only  one  participant  in  each  focus  group  exercised  regularly. 
Participants in groups B and C considered walking to go grocery shopping as a form 
of exercise, while those in group A did not.   

5.2  Utility and Ease of Use of WaSSAA 

We found that all participants elaborate some kind of list of groceries and products to 
buy, and considered the list provided by WaSSAA to be easy to use. They all agreed 
that  the  service  to  compare  was  useful  and  they  were  in  general  surprised  that  a 
mobile  phone  could  be  capable  of  integrating  such  service.  Participants  in  group  B 
and  C  even  suggested  that  having  this  information  could  make  them  change  their 
shopping  habits.  When  asked  if  they  would  change  anything  in  the  app  to  make  it 
more  useful  or  easy  to  use  they  made  no  suggestions.  Apparently  their  lack  of 
familiarity  with  this  type  of  devices  and  applications  made  it  difficult  for  them  to 
criticize  the  interface.  On  the  other  hand,  they  all  agreed  that  the  information  was 
clear and easy to understand.  

With  respect  to  using  the  application  to  collect  price  information,  they  were  all 
reluctant to do that, even when they were told that this information would be useful to  
 

 

78 

N. Hernández et al. 

other  shoppers.  Only  when  they  were  told  that  they  could  obtain  a  retribution  for 
doing this, in the form of discounts of coupons for grocery shopping, they expressed 
enthusiasm with the idea. 

5.3 

Socialization Strategies Associated to Grocery Shopping 

The participants in all three groups look for opportunities to socialize with friends and 
family. They all consider grocery shopping as a social activity, particularly those in 
group  A,  who  are  friends  with  the  owners  of  the  shops  they  frequent.  All  of  them 
mentioned that they sometimes call friends to let them know of discounts they have 
seen in a market or advertised elsewhere. As one of the participants mentioned: 

"The  orange  for  example  has  been  at  less  than  4  pesos  per  kilo,  the  good  one  (without 
seeds)… as far as I remember I have told this to more than two people and it seems that they 
have taken advantage [of this deal]”.  (Participant, Group B) 

Frequently they go shopping with a friend, with those who have a car often inviting 
those  who  do  not,  when  they  go  shopping  to  a  larger,  more  distant  shop.  They 
appreciate the fact that grocery shopping keeps them socially and physically active. 

"[if  there  were  home  delivery]  I  wouldn’t use  it, because  I  would  have  a lot  of  free  time. 
When you go to the market you walk, talk with other people, see different things.. you distract 
and relax yourself. I don’t want to be in-doors at home all day”. 

They all appreciated the services offered by WaSSAA to promote socialization by 
coordinating  the  shopping  sessions  as  illustrated  in  the  scenario  described.  A 
participant in group C, who has some difficulties walking due to a hip problem, even 
suggested that she would like to know if friends are passing in front of her house to go 
outside and chat with them. 

6 

Conclusions  

In this paper, we describe the design and formative evaluation of WaSSAA, a mobile 
and  context-aware  tool  that  promotes  active  aging  by  transforming  the  shopping 
experience of older adults. WaSSAA takes into consideration the distance, cost, and 
time for travelling to the market as contextual information to help older adults make 
an informed decision to where to go grocery-shopping balancing savings, exercising 
and  socialization.  While  there  are  some  mobile  apps  that  support  certain  aspects  of 
grocery shopping, such as managing a shopping list (iGrocery [7] or Grocery iQ), or 
monitoring shopping time [13], and many others that monitor physical activity, none 
of these efforts aim at supporting active aging through grocery shopping 

The  primary  contribution  of  this  work  was  to  articulate  and  explore  the  design 
space  of  using  mobile  and  context-aware  computing  to  promote  active  aging.  Our 
results  indicate  our  approach  is  feasible  and  perceived  as  useful  by  older  adults  of 
three  different  countries.  We  plan  to  fully  develop  the  system  and  conduct  a 
deployment evaluation to see its impact in everyday grocery shopping practices. 

 

 

Mobile and Context-Aware Grocery Shopping to Promote Active Aging 

79 

References 

[1]  Gersch, M., Lindert, R., Hewing, M.: AAL-business models: Different Prospects for the 
Successful  Implementation  of  Innovative  Services  in  the  Primary  and  Secondary 
Healthcare Market. In: AALIANCE Conference, Malaga, Spain (2010) 

[2]  WHO 

(World  Health  Organization),  Active  ageing:  a  policy 

framework, 

WHO/NMH/NPH/02.8. WHO, Geneva (2002) 

[3]  Wiederhold,  B.K.,  Riva,  G.,  Graffigna,  G.:  Ensuring  the  best  care  for  our  increasing 
aging population: health engagement and positive technology can help patients achieve a 
more active role in future healthcare. Cyberpsychol. Behav. Soc. Netw. 16(6), 411–412 
(2013) 

[4]  Lawton,  M.P.,  Brody,  E.M.:  Assessment  of  older  people:  Self-maintaining  and 

instrumental activities of daily living. Gerontologist 9, 179–186 (1969) 

[5]  Zeitham,  V.A.,  Fuerst,  W.L.:  Age  Differences  in  Response  to  Grocery  Store  Price 

Information. Journal of Consumer Affairs 17(2), 402–420 (1983) 

[6]  Deng,  L.,  Cox,  L.P.:  LiveCompare:  grocery  bargain  hunting  through  participatory 
sensing.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  10th  Workshop  on  Mobile  Computing  Systems  and 
Applications (HotMobile 2009). ACM, New York (2009) 

[7]  Sangeetha, S., Prashant, N., Abdelsalam, H.: iGrocer: a ubiquitous and pervasive smart 
grocery  shopping  system.  In:  ACM  Symposium  on  Applied  Computing,  pp.  645–652 
(2003) 

[8]  GroceryiQ. Shopping list app, http://www.groceryiq.com/  

(visited on September 2013) 

[9]  Beyer,  H.,  Holtzblatt,  K.:  Contextual  design:  defining  customer  centered  systems. 

Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco (1998) 

[10]  Kenesei, A., Todd, S.: The Use of Price in the Purchase Decision. Journal of Empirical 

Generalisations in Marketing Science 8(1) (2003) 

[11]  Tongren,  H.N.:  Determinant  Behavior  Characteristics  of  Older  Consumers.  Journal  of 

Consumer Affairs 22(1), 136–157 (1988) 

[12]  Sirvanci, M.: An Empirical Study of Price  Thresholds and Price Sensitivity. Journal of 

Applied Business Research 9(2), 43–49 (1993) 

[13]  You, C.-W., et al.: Using Mobile Phones to Monitor Shopping Time at Physical Stores. 

IEEE Pervasive Computing 10(2), 37–43 (2011) 

 

