Using Smart TV Applications for Providing Interactive

Ambient Assisted Living Services to Older Adults

José M. Tapia, Francisco J. Gutierrez(✉), and Sergio F. Ochoa

Department of Computer Science, University of Chile, Beauchef 851, 3rd Floor, Santiago, Chile

{jtapia,frgutier,sochoa}@dcc.uchile.cl

Abstract.  The irruption of computer-based technology in social interaction has
negatively aﬀected the way in which elderly people interact with their family
members, because they are, in some cases, reluctant to adopt new digital media.
Given that literature suggests that seniors spend a signiﬁcant part of their day
watching television, we argue that Smart TV applications can be an eﬀective way
to provide them access to ambient assisted living services. This paper reports the
design and use of a Smart TV-based application that promotes social interaction
between older adults and their family members through social media. The system
runs on a LED screen, extended with smart functionalities provided by Google
Chromecast.  The  social  interaction  features  provided  by  the  system  include
exchanging email messages and sharing photos that are automatically retrieved
from the accounts of family members in social media feeds. The system was
evaluated with a group of expert users as well as with a sample of end-users. Older
adults participating in the study praised the new possibilities oﬀered by the proto‐
type application as a way to better engage with family-generated content, thus
facilitating their social integration.
Keywords: Older adults · Interactive AAL services · Technology appropriation ·
Social isolation · Design challenges · Chromecast

1

Introduction

The use of social media applications and services has inadvertently increased the risk
of social isolation among older adults, given that family members tend to overlook the
traditional interaction spaces that the elderly traditionally used for socializing [7, 18,
24]. A recent survey conducted in Chile [6] shows that almost 25 % of older adults
consider  themselves  excluded  or  socially  isolated,  while  40  %  declare  to  miss  the
company of people around them. Similarly, a study conducted with a random sample of
3,858 older adults in Finland shows that 77 % of them suﬀered from social isolation or
continuously feel lonely [26]. Although the proportion of socially isolated people varies
across diﬀerent cultures and societies, it is clear that this is currently a global issue [4].
Broadly speaking, the notion of wellbeing in older adults is not restricted to main‐
taining a good physical health state –such as being autonomous with sustainable levels
of mobility and functionality–, but it also considers maintaining a good social health –
such  as  keeping  active  within  close  social  networks–  [25].  Previous  research  in

© Springer International Publishing AG 2016
C.R. García et al. (Eds.): UCAmI 2016, Part I, LNCS 10069, pp. 514–524, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-48746-5_53

Using Smart TV Applications for Providing Interactive Ambient

515

gerontology and social psychology has also shown that the quantity and quality of social
relationships  impacts  the  overall  mental  and  physical  health  of  older  adults,  their
behavior, and their mortality rate [10, 11, 27].

The social isolation suﬀered by older adults during the last two decades seems to be
rooted in several causes. One of them is the increasing use of computer-mediated tech‐
nology for communicating in informal settings, given because that these tools oﬀer
provide more ﬂexibility and reduce help optimize the invested time in the interaction
[22]. However, a large number of older adults are still reluctant to use technology for
communicating with their families and friends, so this reduces their available interaction
space [9]. Another cause that explains an increasing social isolation in elderly people is
the underlying time and media preference asymmetries among older adults and the other
members within their social networks, which are documented in several studies (e.g.,
[9, 14–16]).

Unfortunately, the challenge of socially integrating older adults to their families is
not easy to address, as the elderly usually suﬀer from cognitive and motor impairments
that limit their technology adoption [13]. In that respect, it is desirable to consider a
smooth technology appropriation approach when designing systems for older adults,
thus respecting the people preferences, practices, and routines [12]. Following such an
approach, and trying to ﬁnd a sound way to introduce ambient assisted living (AAL)
services that help the elderly reduce their social isolation, we developed a Smart TVbased 
system with that purpose.

In a previous work, we discussed how to design tablet-based applications and serv‐
ices  to  increase  family  connection  with  older  adults  through  the  system  prototype
SocialConnector [17]. This paper builds on such work to explore the eﬀectiveness of
using Smart TV applications to reach the same goal. In fact, older people tend to spend
more time watching television than younger people, although they enjoy this experience
less [5].

Next section discusses related work regarding the usage and design challenges of
TV-based services targeted to older adults. Section 3 presents the software architecture
of the proposed  system and explains its main components.  Section 4 is  devoted  to
describe the evaluation process and present the preliminary results of the system in terms
of usability and perceived usefulness. Based on this, we discuss design alternatives and
open challenges for providing AAL services for elderly people through Smart TVs.
Finally, we conclude and provide perspectives on further work.

2 Related Work

Prior literature suggests several principles aimed to guide the design of TV-based appli‐
cations for older adults (e.g., [3, 8, 19, 21, 28]). Recognizing the heterogeneous set of
digital skills among older adults, Rice and Alm [23] designed a set of prototypes and
interaction metaphors aimed to ease the appropriation of TV-based applications by this
population. According to the authors, there are two main challenges to address: (1)
provide an appropriate input control and (2) actively take into consideration on-screen
interaction.  Therefore,  the main  concepts  that  need  to  be  considered  in  design  and

516

J.M. Tapia et al.

prototyping  are:  providing  clear  and  concise  navigation,  as  well  as  satisfying  the
achievement of goals in an easy way. Moreover, the design of simpliﬁed remote controls
allows a more successful navigation over the screen, whereas navigational techniques
miming  aspects  of  real-world  artifacts  provide  concrete  aﬀordances  to  older
adults [23].

Designing engaging experiences using TVs as the main interaction device is not
restricted to just providing clean and accessible interfaces. An important extension of
the involvement with the visual content is provided by the remote control, which is
largely the key input device for interacting with TV-based services. In that respect,
Bobeth et al. [2] studied the overall performance and older adults’ preference on using
three diﬀerent input devices for controlling interactive TV-based applications: tablets,
freehand gestures, and a physical remote control. The results show that a mirrored TV
screen on a tablet outperforms the other two options to control linear TV applications
according to the opinion of older adults. In addition, according to the authors, it is also
wise to avoid unnecessary display switches.

TV-based applications are also useful as a way to mitigate the negative eﬀects of
social  isolation,  by  providing  interactive  means  to  engage  with  the  content  and
surrounding elements and actors in the physical world. For instance, Orso et al. [20]
conceived SeniorChannel, a TV application that allows users to access and interact with
TV content through a simple interface. According to the authors, interactive multimedia
has the potential not only to turn TV watching to an active experience, but also as a way
to improve social inclusion. Similarly, Alaoui and Lewkowicz [1] designed Smart TV
applications aimed to support social activities for elderly people.

In this paper, we extend the design of the latest version of SocialConnector [17],
with the goal of observing the possible eﬀects of changing the interaction device as a
way to facilitate social interaction and to enhance the overall perception of social inte‐
gration. The new system, named SocialConnectorTV, is a lite version of the original
system, which runs in a smartphone and displays in the Smart TV the visual information
delivered by the social interaction services. Next we present the system architecture and
its main components.

3 System Architecture

Diﬀerent Smart TV manufacturers have mounted their displays upon several middle‐
ware and operating systems (e.g., Android, LG WebOS, and Samsung Tizen). This
diversity led us to make decisions about the hardware to test for deployment.

Given that our initial system prototype runs over a native Android tablet-based plat‐
form [17], we opted to maintain this line of development and stick to a Smart TV device
capable of running the same operating system. The rationale behind this decision is to
reduce development eﬀort, mitigate software compatibility issues during migration, and
the  possibility  to comparatively  study  the performance  and  overall  user  experience
between the deployed system running on a Smart TV and on a state-of-the art tablet PC.
Therefore, we initially opted to deploy our system on a standard LED TV equipped with

Using Smart TV Applications for Providing Interactive Ambient

517

a Google Chromecast device1, which is a digital media player that streams multimedia
content and runs software applications casted from a third-party device. In this case, we
used a smartphone running SocialConnector TV to cast the software to the TV display.
This workaround is not noticed by end-users and older adults therefore assume that the
developed application is running in the Smart TV.

In order to interact with the application, older adults use an ad-hoc remote control.
Such a device is implemented as a software application that runs in a smartphone, acting
as the “controller” of the system and embedding most of the social interaction services
considered in the original SocialConnector system. This application uses Chromecast
as a mediator to display visual content on the TV screen (Fig. 1).

Fig. 1. Operational environment of the solution

Fig. 2. Software architecture of SocialConnector TV

The communication between the smartphone and the Internet can be performed using
WiFi or a regular mobile phone network (3G or 4G). The communication between the

1 https://www.google.com/chromecast/tv/.

518

J.M. Tapia et al.

smartphone and the Chromecast uses WiFi, and that between the Chromecast and the
Smart TV is done through an HDMI cable. Next we brieﬂy explain these components
(Fig. 2).

3.1 Remote Control Application
At launch time, the remote control application senses the environment and identiﬁes all
devices (typically TVs) that are equipped with a Chromecast device and are up to one
hop of distance from the smartphone acting as remote control. The list of devices is
displayed to the user through the GUI of the application. Using such a list, the user can
choose a target device (i.e., a particular Smart TV display) and then the application
creates a work session that includes such a smartphone and the selected Smart TV. After
this synchronization stage is concluded, the application is in control of the content to be
displayed in the Smart TV, wirelessly casting the content through Chromecast.

The remote control application has a layered architecture that considers a user inter‐
face, the application logic, and a data repository. The user interface allows older adults
to access and use the provided social interaction services. Figure 3.a shows the main
user interface through which the elderly can send/respond messages (emails), view the
incoming messages, view new photos of their family members (automatically retrieved
from Instagram), or browse the photo album.

(a)

                                           (b)                                               (c) 

Fig. 3. User interfaces of the remote control application

            

When the user chooses the option to send a message or view the photo album, the
list of contacts is shown in the TV displaying a photo of the available family members
to be contacted; i.e., the contact list is a carrousel of pictures of people that the user can
navigate by using the interface presented in Fig. 3.b. This interface also allows the elderly
to select the contact that is expected to receive a message, or the contact whose pictures
will be fetched from his/her Instagram account. If the older adult wants to send or
respond  to  an  incoming  message,  a  microphone  will  be  activated  for  dictating  the

Using Smart TV Applications for Providing Interactive Ambient

519

message (Fig. 3.c). Then, a speech-to-text service transforms the voice message into text
and shows the content for approval. If the content of the message is approved, then it is
transferred to the intended receiver as a regular email; otherwise, it is discarded.

The application logic of the remote control implements the services that allow the
exchange  of  messages  between  the  older  adult  and  his/her  contacts,  automatically
retrieving photos using the Instagram API and processing any attached comments within
the original source. This layer is also in charge of packaging this information and sending
it to the Chromecast for its rendering and display in the Smart TV screen.

The application also has a data repository that manages a local record of the infor‐
mation that is required for the normal operation of SocialConnector TV; for instance,
the list of contacts, the most recent photos and messages for each one of them, the list
of messages and photos already seen by the user, and the information for automatically
logging in to the local user email and Instagram accounts.

3.2 SocialConnector TV
The commands prompted by the user on the remote control application trigger a response
in both the smartphone and the Smart TV screen. For instance, when the user chooses
the option “photo album” (Fig. 3.a), the system displays the contact list in the smart TV
(Fig. 4.a), and simultaneously, the interface to control the interactive system navigation
in the smartphone (Fig. 3.b). If the user selects a contact (e.g., “Natalia”), then he/she
can view Natalia’s photos and navigate through them.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 4. User interface of the SocialConnector TV: (a) list of contacts, (b) picture of the selected
contact

3.3 Chromecast
Finally, the Chromecast component comprises two services: the view logic and the cache
(temporal data repository). The ﬁrst one is a gateway that encapsulates the logic required
to interact with the Smart TV and the remote control application running on the smart‐
phone. The second service records the information that is required to maintain the coor‐
dination between these two devices (e.g., work session information and communication
status) and the information to be displayed on the Smart TV screen.

520

J.M. Tapia et al.

Typically, the view logic of the Chromecast receives two kinds of inputs from the
remote control application: HTML ﬁles and commands. On the one hand, the HTML
ﬁles have the content and graphical elements to be rendered in the Smart TV screen (e.g.,
the information shown in Fig. 4). On the other hand, the commands are used to control
such an interface; for instance, for making focus on a certain option, changing the infor‐
mation  that  is  displayed,  or  navigating  through  the  information  architecture  (e.g.,
advance to the next photo or message). More complex interactions can also be imple‐
mented using the Chromecast as intermediary, since this device is able to process HMTL,
CSS, Javascript, and several formats of digital information.

4 Usability Evaluation

We evaluated the system usability and perceived usefulness in two stages. First, we
conducted  a  laboratory-based  inspection  with  the  aim  to  identify  major  usability
concerns.  Once  these  identiﬁed  issues  were  corrected  in  the  system  prototype,  we
conducted a study with a sample of end-users in a simulated setting.

4.1 Heuristic Inspection with Expert Users
We conducted a ﬁrst usability inspection aiming to identify major issues in the design
of the Smart TV application before evaluating the system with end-users. This inspection
was conducted in two stages: (1) a cognitive walkthrough session performed by the
authors, and (2) a heuristic evaluation by expert users in user interface design for mobile
devices.

Regarding the cognitive walkthrough study session, we deﬁned a set of tasks that
covered  the  diﬀerent  functionalities  oﬀered  by  the  system.  These  tasks  were:  (1)
composing and sending a message to a given contact, and (2) browsing through the
photos of a given family members. While fulﬁlling these tasks, each author assumed
diﬀerent roles aiming to navigate through the diﬀerent interaction paths provided by the
system, as a way to understand how easy it would be for inexperienced end-users to
engage with the application. Once completed the evaluation session, we identiﬁed a set
of key usability concerns that needed to be ﬁxed in order to improve the user experience
of the system.

Subsequently, a panel of three expert users in mobile user interfaces performed a
heuristic evaluation following Nielsen’s usability guidelines, and lifted a second set of
potential  usability  and  user  experience  concerns.  Initially,  the  identiﬁed  usability
concerns were related to the complexity of the navigation schema, a lack of feedback
on the system status, as well as few meaningful aﬀordances and ﬁt to the mental model
of older adults. All of these concerns were redesigned and corrected for evaluating the
system with older adults.

Using Smart TV Applications for Providing Interactive Ambient

521

4.2 Usability Study with End-Users
Through snowball and convenience sampling, we recruited eight participants acting as
end-users, aged 60 and over (4 women, 4 men), with a low-level of technology appro‐
priation. None of the recruited participants has used nor heard about Chromecast before,
and they rarely used computers and smartphones before. We simulated a home setting
as a living room in our lab, and we asked participants to interact with the system using
as remote control a smartphone provided by us.

Users were individually and independently asked to complete a set of tasks following
the thinking aloud protocol, where they were prompted to express their thoughts as they
were performing  the  evaluation.  As  with  the  ﬁrst  usability  inspection,  the  required
activities to be performed by end-users were: (1) compose and send a message to a family
member, and (2) browse the photos of a given family member.

The ﬁrst author introduced the system to participants and moderated the session, the
second author observed how the participants interacted with the system and kept hand‐
written notes throughout the process, and the third author kept track of the number of
errors and spent time in completing the proposed tasks. By error we note any action that
does not ﬁt within the expected interaction ﬂow, such as misunderstanding the elements
displayed in the user interface. Table 1 summarizes the tasks performed by the partici‐
pants and the obtained results.

Table 1. Summary statistics of the evaluation results.

Std. Dev. Mean number of

Assigned task

1. Compose and send a message
to a family member
2. Browse through the photos of
a given family member

Mean time spent
(minutes)
1.4

1.1

0.5

0.2

errors
1.9

1.3

Std. Dev.

0.9

0.5

The ﬁrst result that we can highlight is that all participants were able to complete the
assigned tasks, although most of them never interacted with a Smart TV before. The
time spent for completing the tasks was in the same range as that observed in our previous
experience evaluating the system running in Tablet PCs [17]. Therefore, if we consider
that the participants were interacting with Smart TVs for the very ﬁrst time, the observed
values become highly promising due to a possible continuous learning eﬀect over time
during actual use.

In addition, we observed that some participants asked many questions to the assistant,
showing that they were afraid to making mistakes. Therefore, self-conﬁdence in the use
of the application will also contribute to further reduce times and quantity of errors when
using the application. This consideration should be noted when improving the design of
our system and further developments aiming for providing AAL services to older adults.
An alternative to deal with this issue is proposing meaningful and contextualized tuto‐
rials, which would contribute to helping older adults smooth their learning curve, conse‐
quently improving their conﬁdence on interacting with the system.

522

J.M. Tapia et al.

Once  all  users  individually  and  independently  completed  their  tasks,  they  were
invited to discuss altogether with the authors in a focus group session aiming to assess
the perceived usefulness of the evaluated application. Most participants were highly
enthusiastic of using the system. Overall, they perceived the application as quite useful
and praised the new possibilities oﬀered by SocialConnector TV as a way to better
engage with family-generated content, thus facilitating their social interaction within
their social networks. Although participants appreciated the design and aesthetics of the
main user interface displayed on the TV screen, as well as the remote control application
embedded in the smartphone, most of them stated they were not conﬁdent enough on
using the system without external assistance.

P4: “I liked the application and it seems to be quite useful for me. However, I am not sure if I
will be able to browse its diﬀerent features when alone at home”.
Following on the number of errors made while fulﬁlling the proposed tasks, one of
the most signiﬁcant sources of trouble for participants is concerned with understanding
the semiotics of the proposed service icons (Fig. 3.a). Given that expert users also raised
a concern related to the design and meaning of the proposed icons, we conclude that
more attention should be devoted to improving the design and understanding of the
service icons in further developments. Following the comments suggested by some
users, short labels could be added to the redesigned icons as a way to enhance the
meaning of such actions. All in all, the metaphors used to represent the list of contacts
and messages were not clear for end-users and will be improved in a next iteration of
the evaluated system.

P7: “I think I got lost somewhere, because I did not understand quite well what those buttons
did on the TV. Perhaps it would be useful if they had some short text or labels to enhance what
they try to mean”.
In summary, although the evaluation results show the application still has space for
improvement, the most important aspect to highlight is the fact that the participants were
able to accomplish the assigned tasks and were engaged during the activity. This leads
us to expect more interesting results for the next iteration of this system.

5 Conclusions and Future Work

In this paper we present a prototype application running on Smart TVs for facilitating
the social integration of older adults within their family networks. The system was
developed using Google Chromecast, a promising technology for allowing interactive
applications to be deployed in home TV settings.

The development of our system raised two main challenges: (1) conceive a usable
remote control application, and (2) providing a useful layout in the TV screen. Although
the preliminary evaluation of the system shows that older adults participating in the
study consider it to be useful, there is still some space for improvement, particularly in
terms on the design of user feedback, the proposed aﬀordances, and providing mean‐
ingful metaphors to assist the end-users in learning how to interact with the application.

Using Smart TV Applications for Providing Interactive Ambient

523

We  argue  that  by  addressing  these  concerns,  older  adults  would  improve  their
engagement with the system.

As future work, we aim to deploy a second prototype running on AndroidTV devices.
This would allow us to conduct a 3-factor in-the-wild study, aiming to compare in the
usage and appropriation of our technology to mediate family interaction between: (1)
state-of-the-art tablets, (2) TVs equipped with Chromecast, and (3) Smart TVs running
dedicated software.

Acknowledgments.  This work has been partially supported by the Fondecyt Project (Chile),
grant: 1150252. The work of Francisco J. Gutierrez has been supported by the Ph.D. Scholarship
Program of Conicyt Chile (CONICYT-PCHA/Doctorado Nacional/2013-21130075).

References

1. Alaoui, M., Lewkowicz, M.: Struggling against social isolation of the elderly – the design of
SmartTV applications. In: Dugdale, J., Masclet, C., Grasso, M.A., Boujut, J.-F., Hassanaly,
P. (eds.) From Research to Practice in the Design of Cooperative Systems: Results and Open
Challenges, pp. 261–275. Springer, London (2012)

2. Bobeth, J., Schrammel, J., Deutsch, S., Klein, M., Drobics, M., Hochleitner, C., Tscheligi,
M.: Tablet, gestures, remote control? inﬂuence of age on performance and user experience
with iTV applications. In: Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on Interactive
Experiences for TV and Online Video (TVX 2014), pp. 139–146 (2014)

3. Carmichael, A.: Style Guide for the Design of Interactive Television Services for Elderly

Viewers. Independent Television Commission, Winchester (1999)

4. Cloutier-Fisher, D., Kobayashi, K., Smith, A.: The subjective dimension of social isolation:
a qualitative investigation of older adults’ experiences in small social support networks. J.
Aging Stud. 25(4), 407–414 (2011)

5. Depp, C.A., Schkade, D.A., Thompson, W.K., Jeste, D.V.: Age, Aﬀective Experience, and

Television Use. Am. J. Prev. Med. 39(2), 173–178 (2010)

6. Fernández, B., Herrera, M.S., Valenzuela, E.: Chile and their elderly people – third national

survey on quality of life in elderly people. Ministry of Social Development, Chile (2014)

7. Giddens, A.: Conversations with Anthony Giddens: Making Sense of Modernity. Stanford

University Press, Stanford (1998)

8. GIll, J., Perera, S.: Accessible universal design of interactive digital television. In: Proceedings

of the European Conference on Interactive Television (EuroITV 2003), pp. 83–89 (2003)

9. Gutierrez, F.J., Ochoa S.F.: Mom, i do have a family!: attitudes, agreements, and expectations
on the interaction  with chilean older adults. In: Proceedings of the ACM Conference on
Computer-Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing (CSCW 2016), pp. 1400–
1409 (2016)

10. House, J.S., Landis, K.R., Umberson, D.: Social relationships and health. Science 241, 540–

545 (1988)

11. House, J.S.: Social isolation kills, but how and why? Psychosom. Med. 63(2), 273–274 (2001)
12. Janneck, M.: Recontextualizing technology in appropriation processes. In: Whitworth, B., de
Moor, A. (eds.) Handbook of Research on Socio-Technical Design and Social Networking
Systems, pp. 153–166. IGI Global, Hershey (2009)

13. Koltay, T.: The media and the literacies: media literacy, information literacy, digital literacy.

Media Cult. Soc. 33(2), 211–221 (2011)

524

J.M. Tapia et al.

14. Lindley,  S.E.,  Harper,  R.,  Sellen,  A.:  Designing  for  elders:  exploring  the  complexity  of
relationships in later life. In: Proceedings of the British HCI Group Annual Conference on
HCI (BCS-HCI 2008), pp. 77–86 (2008)

15. Lindley, S.E., Harper, R., Sellen, A.: Desiring to be in touch in a changing communications
landscape: attitudes of older adults. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2009), pp. 1693–1702 (2009)

16. Muñoz, D., Cornejo, R., Gutierrez, F.J., Favela, J., Ochoa, S.F., Tentori, M.: A social cloudbased 
tool to deal with time and media mismatch of intergenerational family communication.
Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 53, 140–151 (2015)

17. Muñoz, D., Gutierrez, F.J., Ochoa, S.F.: Introducing ambient assisted living technology at the
home of the elderly: challenges and lessons learned. In: Cleland, I., Guerrero, L., Bravo, J.
(eds.)  IWAAL  2015.  LNCS,  vol.  9455,  pp.  125–136.  Springer,  Heidelberg  (2015).  doi:
10.1007/978-3-319-26410-3_12

18. Neal, A.G., Collas, S.F.: Intimacy and Alienation: Forms of Estrangement in Female/Male

Relationships. Garland Publishing, New York (2000)

19. Nunes, F., Kerwin, M., Silva, P.A.: Design recommendations for TV user interfaces for older
adults:  ﬁndings  from  the  eCAALYX  project.  In:  Proceedings of  the  ACM  SIGACCESS
Conference on Computers and Accessibility (ASSETS 2012), pp. 41–48 (2012)

20. Orso, V., Spagnolli, A., Gamberini, L., Ibañez, F., Fabregat, M.E.: Interactive Multimedia
Content for Older Adults: The Case of SeniorChannel. Multimedia Tools and Applications
(2016). http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11042-016-3553-5

21. Pak, R., McLaughlin, A.: Designing Displays for Older Adults. CRC Press, Boca Raton (2010)
22. Preece, J., Rogers, Y., Sharp, H.: Interaction Design: Beyond Human-Computer Interaction.

John Wiley & Sons, Chichester (2015)

23. Rice, M., Alm, N.: Designing new interfaces for digital interactive television usable by older

adults. Comput. Entertainment 6(1), 6:1–6:20 (2008)

24. Thomas, P.A.: Trajectories of social engagement and limitations in late life. J. Health Soc.

Behav. 52(4), 430–443 (2011)

25. Thumala, D., Arnold, M., Massad, C., Herrera, F.: Social Inclusion and Exclusion of Elderly
People in Chile – Fourth National Survey on Social Inclusion and Exclusion. Ministry of
Social Development, Chile (2015)

26. Tilvis, R.S., Routasalo, P., Karppinen, H., Strandberg, T.E., Kautiainen, H., Pitkala, K.H.:
Social isolation, social activity and loneliness as survival indicators in old age: a nationwide
survey with a 7-year follow-up. Eur. Geriatr. Med. 3(1), 18–22 (2012)

27. Umberson, D., Montez, J.K.: Social relationships and health: a ﬂashpoint for health policy. J.

Health Soc. Behav. 51, 54–66 (2010)

28. Zaphiris,  P.,  Ghiawadwala,  M.,  Mughal,  S.:  Age-centered  research-based  web  design
guidelines.  Extended  Abstracts  of  the  ACM  SIGCHI  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in
Computing Systems (CHI-EA 2005), pp. 1897–1900 (2005)

