 

A Simple and Portable Command Post to Coordinate 
Search and Rescue Activities in Disaster Relief Efforts  

Rodrigo Bartels1, Valeria Herskovic2, Alvaro Monares2, Sergio F. Ochoa2,  

José A. Pino2, and Marcos R.S. Borges3 

1 Computer Science and Informatics School, University of Costa Rica, Costa Rica 

rodrigo.bartels@ecci.ucr.ac.cr 

2 Computer Science Department, Universidad de Chile, Chile 

{vherskov,amonares,sochoa,jpino}@dcc.uchile.cl 

3 Department of Computer Science, Univ. Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 

mborges@nce.ufrj.br 

Abstract.  The  lack  of  communication  channels  and  support  information  can 
make the critical search and rescue of survivors after a disaster  an ineffective 
process  resulting  in  losses.  This  work  addresses  this  problem  by  proposing  a 
simple and portable command post application based on mobile devices and adhoc 
networks. The application provides support to communication and collaboration 
aiming to speed up the SAR process. The system architecture and some 
implementation issues are also presented.  

Keywords: Portable command post, search and rescue, coordination activities, 
information support, mobile workers support, low-cost system. 

1   Introduction 

When large-scale disasters affect urban areas, large response efforts must be done in 
order  to  try  to  minimize  the  effect  of  the  extreme  event  on  the  population.  Earthquakes,
 tsunamis, volcano eruptions and floods are some of these extreme events. A 
large  number  of  organizations  participate  in  the  relief  effort:  police,  firefighters, 
health organizations, government agencies, ONGs, and even citizens, who may look 
for and try to rescue other people. 

In these situations, it is common to hear about improvisation, delayed assistance, 
lack of information to make decisions, and lack of communication and coordination 
among the first responders conducting the response process [13]. The empirical evidence 
shows there is  no country prepared enough to deal  with  large-scale disasters. 
This situation is worse in countries with limited resources (such as personnel, equipment,
  and  transportation  systems),  where  first  responders  need  to  conduct  fast  and 
effective response processes. Recent earthquakes in Haiti and Chile unveiled the challenges 
to be addressed by assistance organizations when the need for response largely 
overcomes the capability of the task force. 

A very urgent and critical activity to be conducted after a natural catastrophe is the 
search and rescue of survivors. Typically, firefighters play a key role in this activity, 
because they are trained to be the first-line task force during emergencies. In the case 

G. Kolfschoten, T. Herrmann, and S. Lukosch (Eds.): CRIWG 2010, LNCS 6257, pp. 337–344, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 

338 

R. Bartels et al. 

of  Chile  and  several  other  countries,  firefighters  are  basically  volunteers.  Furthermore,
 their organizations typically have little state-funded support. Thus, any solution 
they apply or use in the field must involve a low cost for the organization.  

Firefighters have a clear protocol that allows them not only to work autonomously, 
but also to cooperate with other units in order to reach a common goal. Moreover, the 
search  and  rescue  (SAR)  protocol  allows  firemen  to  trigger  relief  efforts  within  a 
short  time  period  of  48-72  hours.  However  several  studies  indicate  the  first  24-48 
hours are the most critical ones to rescue survivors [2; 4].  

This  article  proposes  a  simple  and  portable  command  post  to  improve  the  effectiveness 
 and  speed  of  the  search  and  rescue  process.  This  command  post  can  be  
implemented  through  a  lightweight  and  autonomous  collaborative  system  including 
pre-loaded information to support decision-making.  

Section 2 describes the main issues involved in the search and rescue international 
protocol.  Section  3  explains  the  design  aspects  involved  in  the  proposed  portable 
command post. Section 4 presents and discusses the related work. Section 5 presents 
the conclusions and future work. 

2   Search and Rescue International Protocol 

The  first  preventive  task  that  has  to  be  done  before  a  large-scale  emergency  is  the 
definition of a protocol to guide rescue efforts. The Incident Command System (ICS) 
establishes a well-known and validated protocol for addressing emergencies of various 
sizes, within a flexible and scalable organization [9]. This response protocol establishes 
 the  first  team  arriving  to  the  emergency  site  is  in  charge  of  the  response 
process.  The  most  experienced  firefighter  in  the  field  becomes  the  incident  commander 
(IC). The incident commander works in the command post, which is located 
in  a  safe  area;  usually  outside  of  the  emergency  site.  This  person  is  responsible  for 
organizing, coordinating and controlling the relief efforts. The IC also acts as a hub 
that gathers and distributes information from/to the rescuers.  

The  IC  task  force  includes  personnel  in  charge  of  the  operations,  logistics  and 
planning area (Fig. 1). The operations team leader (OTL) is in charge of requesting 
and coordinating actions in the field. This person divides the team in small units and 
assigns them a unique work area and 
a  specific  goal.  Each  response  unit 
has  a  leader,  who  is  in  charge  of 
coordinating 
and 
reporting  information  to  the  OTL. 
Similarly,  the  OTL  reports  to  the 
incident commander. 

rescuers 

the 

While  the  work  done  by  response 
teams  is  important,  the  work  performed 
by the IC and the OTL plays 
a  key  role  in  the  search  and  rescue 
process.  Most  decisions  made  in  the 
field  are  supported  by  information 
provided by these persons. 

 

Fig. 1. Incident command system hierarchy 

 

  A Simple and Portable Command Post to Coordinate Search and Rescue Activities 

339 

Today many IC and OTL continue using whiteboards, paper and pencils to perform 
their job. Most of the information these persons exchange among them and with the 
response unit leaders is based on paper and radio messages. The main reasons to use 
these tools are two: (1) they have proven to be useful in traditional emergency management,
  and  (2)  the  alternative  solutions  available  in  the  market  are  too  expensive 
for volunteer firefighting organizations. 

This  paper  proposes  to  replace  this  traditional  command  post  by  a  portable  one 
able to run on a laptop or tablet PC. This command post is easy to transport and deploy.
 Its cost is similar to the cost of the device where it is running. The collaborative 
system  implementing  the  command  post  functionality  is  used  by  the  IC,  OTL  and 
response unit leaders. Thus the information exchanged among these people may become 
fast and accurate, making the SAR process more efficient and less error-prone. 
The proposed portable command post also improves the way in which the information 
is presented in order to improve the support for decision-making. 

3   Portable Command Post 

This proposal is based on the authors’ previous work [8], which currently helps firefighters 
to manage daily emergencies in urban areas, e.g. fires and car crashes. This 
legacy  system  implements  a  fully  distributed  peer-to-peer  architecture  that  allows 
collaboration between firemen using two versions of the same system: a lightweight 
version (that runs on PDAs and smartphones) and a full functional version (running 
on laptops, desktops and tablet PCs). This application can be used standalone, but in 
such case the system features are reduced to a Geographical Information System that 
embeds location resource functionalities (through GPS) and support to do annotations.  
The system also allows users to mark interest points and areas on the digital map 
(e.g. the emergency site, nearest hydrants and hospital), and also request information 
about the current response process conducted at a certain emergency (e.g. emergency 
type and location, involved trucks, and fire companies attending the event).   

In  case  of  large-scale  disasters  affecting  urban  areas,  the  probability  to  find  the 
physical  infrastructure  just  as  it  was  before  the  extreme  event  is  very  low.  In  these 
situations,  there is a need to  count on geographical information of the affected area 
that allows rescuers to perform their work and collaborate with other teams. Having 
on-time and accurate information can help improve the effectiveness and speed of the 
SAR process; and therefore it may help reduce the number of victims.  

3.1   Supporting Fieldwork with Mobile Technology 

In order to help improve information availability, delivery and exchange in the field, 
this  article  proposes  to  adapt  the  legacy  system  to  create  a  portable  command  post 
(PCP) that allows incident commanders and operations team leaders to make on-time 
and effective decisions during SAR processes. The collaborative system implementing 
the PCP inherits the fully distributed peer-to-peer architecture and also the autonomy 
provided by the legacy system.  

The PCP also implements two versions of the system: a lightweight version (that 
runs on smartphones) and a full functional version (that runs on laptops/tablet PCs). 
Although the nodes running full PCP versions act as regular nodes of a mobile ad-hoc 

 

340 

R. Bartels et al. 

network, they embed particular functionality to support the work of the IC and OTL. 
The  lightweight  PCP  supports  the  work  of  the  response  unit  leaders,  whom  use  the 
application to display information and mark interest points/areas on the digital map. 

Periodically,  they  have  to  synchronize 
their work, either to inform the command 
post  of  progress  made,  or  to  transmit 
information to other teams beginning their 
work  shifts.  Fig.  2  displays  a  possible 
distribution  of  the  PCP  and  mobile  users 
in the emergency site. Each device has an 
area  of  connectivity  with  other  devices; 
intersection  of  these  areas  mean  the  devices 
can connect to each other. 

  

Fig. 2. PCP deployment in the field

Since the needs of these actors are different,
  they  require  different  devices  for 
accessing data, e.g. laptops, smartphones. 
The  ideal  situation  would  be  to  have  a 
truck  or  building  dedicated  to  communications  support.  The  operations  team  leader 
can  input  hand-written  information  and  make  decisions  using  a  tablet  PC,  as  he  is 
more likely to be on the move. Unit leaders can access relevant information (e.g. the 
marked  building  plan  of  the  area  assigned  to  his  unit)  through  mobile  devices  that 
support high mobility, such as smartphones. 

This ideal situation may be unlikely, due to insufficient resources or the impossibility 
to reach an isolated location by land. In that case, the portable command post 
may consist of laptops, and the rest of the users may interact using smartphones. The 
portable command post is suitable to support work in these three scenarios, and it is 
therefore adaptable to diverse conditions. The PCP can provide several services that 
are  not  available  in  a  whiteboard  or  paper-based  information,  e.g.  timely  access  to 
information, and to exchange information with other interested parties.  

3.2   Portable Command Post Services 

The PCP system is based on maps, since they provide firemen with orientation in an 
unknown  area.  The  map  can  help  them  find  access  to  water  sources,  safe  places  in 
case of sudden threats, and location of resources. This base map may be a road map, 
satellite, hybrid map, or all three depending on the availability of data for the affected 
area. However, since  the  geography of a place  may change after an emergency, the 
tool also provides firefighters with services to pinpoint the emergency area over the 
base  map, as shown in Fig. 3a and Fig. 3b, as  well as  mark other points of interest 
(e.g., field hospitals to treat the wounded). 

Firemen  usually  need  a  higher  level  of  detail  than  the  one  provided  by  the  georeferenced 
maps (e.g. distribution of apartments on a building floor). In these cases, 
hand-drawn maps can be created like the ones in Fig. 3c and Fig. 3d. The maps are 
organized in a hierarchical (zoom in – zoom out) collection, in which firefighters can 
explore an emergency area at various levels of detail. Relevant information added to 
the lower levels should also be visible at higher levels in aggregate form. For example,
 the incident commander has marked in green those areas where work is finished,  

 

 

  A Simple and Portable Command Post to Coordinate Search and Rescue Activities 

341 

 

 

(a): General map 

(b): Detailed Area 

(c): Subdivided area 

(d): Subdivision of area C 

Fig. 3. Example of the hierarchical display of maps within PCP 

and in yellow areas with ongoing work (Fig. 3d). This information is also visible in 
the aggregate view presented in Fig. 3c. 

Since  SAR  protocols  may  temporarily  change  because  of  unexpected  circumstances,
 we propose to add semantic meaning to a few fixed options in the PCP system 
(e.g., status of an area, or number of victims found) to permit users to input any 
other  type  of  information  they  consider  is  important  for  the  situation  (e.g.,  stable 
walls, or evacuation routes). Each map should allow users to enter information on it. 
Some information will be used in the aggregate view that is displayed to the IC.  

Typically, the first operation assigned to rescuers is a reconnaissance stage. At this 
stage,  some  groups  will  be  in  the  field  identifying  the  type  of  area,  e.g.  residential, 
commercial, and industrial. The operations team leader will determine those areas that 
should be searched and those that should not. Then, the OTL will assign the task force 
to  the  area,  splitting  them  in  groups  and  assigning  a  sub-area  to  each  group.  Thus, 
each sub-area could be in one of three stages: under review, already reviewed, or to be 
reviewed. As a way to communicate the status of each area in the aggregated view, 
we  propose  a  color  for  each  possible  status:  yellow  for  under  review,  green  for  already 
reviewed, red for an area with a review still pending. Areas not needing review 
will be marked black.  

3.3   Portable Command Post Architecture 

Fig.  4  shows  the  architecture  of  the  application,  which  is  divided  into  three  layers: 
interactive tools (UI), views  handling and data  management. From a UI perspective 
many of the provided features depend on the underlying device. For example, a Tablet 
PC would allow all the proposed features through a stylus, while a regular notebook 
might provide them with a mouse.  

 Services  embedded  in  the  second  layer  manage  two  information  sources:  regular 
geo-referenced maps and sketched maps. The former ones come from GIS and spatial 
databases, and they are stored as vectorial data. The latter ones are drawn by the user 
and they are completely self-contained.  

Data management layer embeds services that allow the application to work in two 

modes: as a standalone or as a collaborative application.  

 

342 

R. Bartels et al. 

In  the  first  case  the  PCP 
works  autonomously  and 
uses  local  data  and  services 
to  provide  its  functionality. 
The data repository can be a 
relational,  XML  or  spatial 
database.  When 
the  PCP 
works in collaborative mode, 
it  requires  counting  on  a 
communication  channel  and 
computing devices to form a 
mobile  ad  hoc  network.  In 
such  case,  the  application 
can  work 
to  a 
traditional 
collaborative 
peer-to-peer  system,  where 
the  nodes  can  exchange  and 
information 
synchronize 
among 
and 
also 
provide awareness of user’s availability and activities. This operation mode can use several 
data  sources; typically  local and remote repositories. In  both operation  modes PCP 
provides services for handling basic annotations like search area status and also for other 
semantic annotations like the ones proposed by the INSARAG standard. PCP also allows 
handle the abstraction level of these annotations.  

Fig. 4. PCP Software Architecture 

 

similar 

them, 

4   Related Work 

The development of Information Technology Systems (ITS) to support the emergency 
response teamwork has many works published in the literature. For a long time, crisis 
management  systems  were  based  in  the  military  model  of  Command  and  Control 
(C&C) [3]. For many authors, the need to change the theories of emergency management 
 creating  new  paradigms  is  imperative  to  improve  the  flexibility  of  the  C&C 
structures  [1,  10].  Their  aim  is  to  make  them  more  efficient,  multi-disciplinary  and 
multi-institutional, increasing the collaboration between C&C and the field responders 
and allowing sharing planning and resources to stabilize the crisis [12]. 

The decision process in C&C rooms has been covered in the literature and several 
studies indicate its complexity [1; 3]. The same situation is true for the first responder 
process in the field, which is very dependent on its contextual knowledge of the event 
as well as the responder’s experience. These issues are also addressed in the literature 
[7; 11]. Recent disasters such as 9/11, the Asian tsunami, the Katrina hurricane and 
the Haiti earthquake demonstrated these limitations [5].  

Similar applications have been developed after several large-scale disasters. Jiang 
et al. [6] developed a similar incident commander supporting tool, but contextualized 
in  a  developed  country  (USA).  They  support  functionality  for  map  sketching  and 
resource management. However, since their work was done during 2003, the available 
mobile  technology  was  not  as  widespread  as  nowadays,  which  limits  the  proposed 

 

  A Simple and Portable Command Post to Coordinate Search and Rescue Activities 

343 

system. Their work is also focused in daily firefighter emergencies instead of largescale 
disasters. Wu et al. [15] present a system prototype (CIVIL) developed to support 
map-based decision-making. Their main goal is to allow a panel of three experts 
(Public Worker, Environmental expert, and Mass Care expert) to develop a plan during 
 an  emergency  situation.  Therefore,  the  application  supports  the  exchange  of  information 
between the different roles and was not designed for chaotic and unplanned 
task forces. Finally, Wagner et al. [13] developed a system called COORDINATORs; 
it  basically  provides  “…decision  support  for  first  response  teams  and  the  incident 
commander by reasoning about mission structures, resource limitations, time considerations,
  and  interactions  between  the  missions  of  different  teams”.  However,  the 
focus of this application is the use of  multi-agent  systems  to actually perform these 
tasks. This approach proposes the automation of the planning and evaluation phases. 
It  differs  from  the  approach  presented  here  which  is  to  facilitate  search  and  rescue 
activities through mobile technological support. 

5   Conclusions and Future Work 

This paper proposes a portable command post (PCP) to support the work of rescuers 
in large-scale emergencies. It was designed considering the SAR activities performed 
mainly by firefighters, whom usually are in charge of doing and coordinate this process.
 The proposal was based on the existing incident command system protocol, and 
provides several advantages over what is in use today. First, the proposed tool is lowcost 
and can be adapted to different scenarios depending on existing resources. Second,
 the tool can be used for various types of emergencies, since it supports work that 
is not routine or planned. Third, this system is superior to whiteboard and paper-based 
systems  in  that  it  may  help  firefighters  quickly  find  relevant  information  as  well  as 
exchange it, and it may even provide mechanisms to share information with outside 
organizations, such as government agencies and the press. Fourth, it is easy to transport 
and deploy the PCP, providing firemen in the field with the autonomy (in term of 
supporting  information  and  services)  required  for  this  type  of  activity.  Finally,  the 
PCP  also  allows  firefighters  to  review  the  emergency  and  analyze  it  by  providing 
technological support. This capability could help firefighters to review their protocols 
and learn for future emergencies. 

The next steps in this initiative include the integration and tuning of the PCP components 
in order to have a complete and stable version of the product. Then, the PCP 
will be used (as a concept proof) to support SAR activities during the search and rescue 
national training program, which is performed by Chilean firefighters.  

Acknowledgements 

This  work  was  partially  supported  by  Fondecyt  (Chile),  grants  Nº  11060467  and 
1080352, and LACCIR grants Nº R0308LAC004 and Nº S1009LAC004. 

 

344 

R. Bartels et al. 

References 

[1]  Beroggi, G.E.G.: Preface: A new paradigm in emergency management. Int. J. Emergency 

Management 1(1), 1–2 (2001) 

[2]  Coburn,  A., Pomonis,  A.,  Sakai,  S., Spence,  R.:  Assessing  human  casualties  caused  by 
building collapse in earthquakes. In: Int. Conf. on the Impact of Natural Disasters, USA 
(1991) 

[3]  Dynes,  R.:  Community  Emergency  Planning:  False  Assumptions  and  Inappropriate 

Analogies. Int. J. of Mass Emergencies and Disasters 12(2), 141–158 (1994) 

[4]  Fiedrich, F., Gehbauer, F., Rickers, U.: Optimized resource allocation for emergency response 
after earthquake disasters. Safety Science 35, 41–57 (2000) 

[5]  Government Accountability Office: First Responders: Much Work Remains To Improve 

Communications Interoperability. Report to Congressional Requesters (2007) 

[6]  Jiang, X., Hong, J.I., Takayama, L.A., Landay, J.A.: Ubiquitous Computing for Firefight-
ers:  Field  Studies  and  Prototypes  of  Large  Displays  for  Incident  Command.  Computer 
Human Interaction 6(1), 679–686 (2004) 

[7]  Landgren, J.: Shared use of information technology in emergency response work: Results 

from a field experiment. In: Proc. of 2nd ISCRAM Conf., pp. 35–41 (2005) 

[8]  Monares,  A.,  Ochoa,  S.F.,  Pino,  J.A.,  Herskovic,  V.,  Rodriguez-Covili,  J.,  Neyem,  A.: 
Mobile Computing in Urban Emergency Situations: Improving the Support to Firefighters 
in the Field. Accepted for Expert Systems with Applications (2010) 

[9]  National Fire Protection Association: NFPA 1670: Standard on Operations and Training 

for Technical Search and Rescue Incidents (2009) 

[10]  Rubin, C.B.: What Hazards and Disasters are Likely in the 21st Century - or Sooner? Nat. 
Haz. Res. Work. Paper #99, Nat. Haz. Res. & Appl. Inf. Center, Univ. of Colorado (1998) 
[11]  Smalley,  J.:  Cognitive  Factors  in  the  analysis,  design  and  assessment  of  command  and 
control system. In: Handbook of cognitive task design, pp. 223–253. L. Erlbaum Assoc., 
Mahwah (2003) 

[12]  Trnka, J., Le Duc, M., Sivertun, A.: Inter-Organizational Issues in ICT, GIS and GSD – 
Mapping  Swedish  Emergency  Management  at  the  local  and  regional  level.  In: Proc. of 
2nd ISCRAM Conf., pp. 75–82 (2005) 

[13]  Wagner,  T.,  Phelps,  J.,  Guralnik,  V.,  VanRiper,  R.:  COORDINATORS:  Coordination 
Managers for First Responders. In: Proc. of the 3rd Int. Joint Conference on Autonomous 
Agents and Multi-agent Systems, vol. 3, p. 1147. IEEE Press, Los Alamitos (2004) 

[14]  Webb, G.R.: Role Improvising During Crisis Situations. Int. Journal of Emergency Management 
2(1-2), 47–61 (2004) 

[15]  Wu, A., Zhang, X., Convertino, G., Carroll, J.: CIVIL: Support Geo-collaboration with 
Information Visualization. In: Proc. of the ACM 2009 International Conference on Supporting 
Group Work, pp. 273–276. ACM Press, New York (2009) 

 

