A Behaviour Awareness Mechanism to Support

Collaborative Learning

Esunly Medina1, Roc Meseguer1(✉), Sergio F. Ochoa2, and Humberto Medina3

1 Department of Computer Architecture, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain

{esunlyma,meseguer}@ac.upc.edu

2 Computer Science Department, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile

3 Department of Aerospace, Electrical and Electronic Engineering,

sochoa@dcc.uchile.cl

Coventry University, Coventry, UK

humberto.medina@coventry.ac.uk

Abstract.  Awareness has been identiﬁed as a key element that aﬀects the quality
of collaboration. Several studies indicate that awareness mechanisms to support
collaborative  learning  activities  should  include  factors  and  stimuli  from  the
students’ context and social interactions. This contributes to enhance the collab‐
oration process and the learning experience of the students. This paper proposes
a behaviour awareness mechanism to support collaborative learning in under‐
graduate  learning  scenarios.  This  mechanism  has  been  designed  to  provide
personal and social awareness to students about both, their own and their peers
learning  behaviour.  Moreover,  this  mechanism  encourages  reﬂection  and
promotes social interactions among students in order to improve the eﬀectiveness
of collaborative learning. The article also describes and evaluates a prototype of
the  proposed  mechanism  and  its  implementation  in  a  collaborative  mobile
learning application, using a case study. The preliminary results show that this
proposal helps promote collaborative learning in undergraduate learning contexts.

Keywords: Collaboration  awareness  ·  Reﬂective  learning  ·  Collaborative
learning · Visual feedback

1

Introduction

Recent learning paradigms suggest that, in order to be successful, learning should be
highly  situated,  collaborative,  informal  and  mobile.  Therefore,  meaningful  learning
activities can take place not only in a conﬁned  space-time  context, but  also across
multiple scenarios and involving several types of students.

The diversity and complexity of contexts where collaborative learning may occur
makes challenging the measurement and assessment of the collaboration process [1, 2].
Usually, the instructor and students have low visibility of such a process while it is being
conducted, and therefore its assessment is done once it is concluded, which is too late
to try intervene (e.g., by providing feedback to students and instructors). This situation
shows a need to count on automatic mechanisms that monitor team members’ activities

© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
N. Baloian et al. (Eds.): CRIWG 2015, LNCS 9334, pp. 95–110, 2015.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-22747-4_8

96

E. Medina et al.

and provide feedback accordingly. These mechanisms could be embedded in collabo‐
rative learning applications to help students evaluate their own and their teammates’
performance, and react on time in case of need. Thus, such collaborative learning appli‐
cations could help improve the students learning experiences.

The ﬁndings of previous research studies highlight that: (i) the eﬀectiveness of a
student  team  is  determined  by  a  combination  of  cognitive,  social  and  motivational
processes,  and  (ii)  collaboration  should  not  only  be  assessed  by  the  quality  of  its
outcomes or achievements [2–4]. Although social interaction has been identiﬁed as a
key element that inﬂuences the quality of collaborative learning [5], there are still various
social  interaction  areas  that  are  unexplored  in  the  context  of  Computer-Supported
Collaborative Learning (CSCL) [2].

Furthermore, awareness has been considered as an extremely valuable feature of
collaborative systems [6] that aﬀects motivation [7] and group coordination [4], and
therefore the quality of any collaboration process. Consequently, many interesting works
in CSCL have been prompted by the need of providing appropriate awareness support
to promote active learning and coordinate students’ activities [3, 4]. In that line, feedback
has been regarded as an extremely important awareness mechanism, which inﬂuences
positively the learning process by providing learners with information that allows them
to improve their performance and learning behaviour [8].

Considering the importance of social interactions in the quality of collaboration and
performance of students’ teams, this paper proposes a visual feedback mechanism to
support CSCL applications. This mechanism was named BAM (Behaviour Awareness
Mechanism), and it provides awareness of the students’ social behaviour, as well as
individual and cognitive elements that aﬀect collaborative learning. A prototype of the
BAM was designed to be embedded in a mobile collaborative learning application, aimed
at providing feedback that encourage reﬂection and promote social interactions among
students.

This  awareness  mechanism  helps  provide  personal  and  social  awareness on  the
learning collaborative behaviour and patterns of the students, delivering feedback in a
direct, dynamic and holistic fashion. To the best of our knowledge, such a type of
awareness provision method has not been previously explored in CSCL. We also believe
that this mechanism can positively impact the quality of collaboration in several other
application areas; therefore, it can be embedded in several types of collaborative appli‐
cations.

This article also report a use case, and the results obtained from an evaluation process.
The results suggest that the proposed BAM is a valuable design element that could be
included as part of the awareness support of CSCL applications, as a way to encourage
reﬂection and foster social interactions between students.

Next section presents a review of related work. Section 3 describes the design of the
prototype developed to provide visual feedback to students. Section 4 reports results of
an evaluation performed to assess the usefulness of our prototype. In addition, Sect. 5
presents a use case that shows how the proposal can be applied in a real-world learning
scenario. Finally, we conclude with a summary of the main contributions of our research
and the future work.

A Behaviour Awareness Mechanism to Support Collaborative Learning

97

2 Related Work

Many studies have addressed the feasibility of providing visual feedback functions in
software systems supporting collaborative learning activities. For example, the work
presented in [7] proposes the introduction of two diﬀerent tools in wiki systems to
increase awareness of each editor’s contribution and of task conﬂict. The ﬁrst tool is a
paragraph-based edit history and a word-based content authorship, for providing aware‐
ness on contributions. The second tool provides feedback of task conﬂicts by assigning
diﬀerent background colours to words or sentences, based on the computation of the
severity of the conﬂict.

In [4] a Web-based group coordination tool for an online course is described and
evaluated. The tool includes functions to visualize the assessments of the members of a
team about their group processes and performance. It also allows comparing theses
values with those from other teams.

Another work that explores the role of awareness in CSCL environments is intro‐
duced in [9]. The authors enhance an existing groupware application with services for
supporting peer feedback and reﬂection. The Radar tool, for peer feedback, facilitates
the collection and display of information about the social and cognitive performance of
a student, from a personal and team perspective. Moreover, Radar was evaluated to
assess its usefulness in providing individual and group awareness about the students’
collaborative behaviour.

The previous proposals diﬀer from the BAM mainly in two diﬀerent aspects: (i) they
focus on a particular type of awareness, such as individual contributions, conﬂict or peer
feedback,  whereas  our  proposal  includes  a  wider  range  of  sources  for  feedback,
providing both subjective and objective information,  (ii) their methods of feedback
provision are restricted to particular contexts; i.e., the previously mentioned solutions
provide awareness only within the context of a speciﬁc collaborative activity, and they
are linked to a particular collaborative application. By contrast, our proposal is intended
to be used across diﬀerent CSCL systems and contexts, and thus, it provides dynamic
as well as longitudinal feedback to the users.

3 Design of the Behaviour Awareness Mechanism

As explained before, we developed a prototype of the Behaviour Awareness Mechanism
(BAM) to provide feedback about the students’ collaborative learning behaviour. Our
design is based on two basic facts: (i) any awareness mechanism must provide an under‐
standing of the activities of others as a context for the activities of the individual [6],
and (ii) the feedback provision in CSCL must ensure that the students are able to relate
their current state of learning and performance with speciﬁc targets or standards [10].
Next we describe the design considerations and the components of the proposed aware‐
ness mechanism.

98

E. Medina et al.

3.1 Design Considerations
As stated in [2], many  educational teams are “ad hoc”. That is, most collaborative
learning teams only exist during speciﬁc tasks or courses, because they were only estab‐
lished for that particular purpose. For that reason, the provision of awareness to support
collaborative learning is frequently focused on a speciﬁc activity or project; therefore,
the supporting application provides only the feedback that is relevant within that partic‐
ular context. Nevertheless, individual experiences in previous collaborative tasks are
usually transferred to collaboration events in the future, and they inﬂuence new group
interactions and outcomes. To a large degree, we based the design of the feedback
mechanism on such an assumption. Hence, we took into account collaborative and indi‐
vidual experiences of the students, as they are clear indicators of their future behaviour.
Our aim is to make students aware of their previous and current social behaviour, and
based on  that, make recommendations (e.g., actions that they could take) that help
improve their collaboration attitude and learning practices.

There is a large amount of literature supporting the fact that there is an intrinsic
relationship between the individual, social, motivational and cognitive aspects involved
in collaborative learning [1–4], and that such a relationship also determines the eﬀec‐
tiveness of a team. Consequently, our proposal takes a holistic approach and provides
awareness about each one of these aspects.

On the other hand, many research works focus on speciﬁc collaboration tools, and
provide  indirect  feedback  about  underlying  aspects  of  the  collaborative  behaviour
extracted from how the users have interacted among them using these tools. The objec‐
tive is to make the user reﬂect on their previous actions, and promote collaboration
through higher engagement with a particular collaboration tool [7]. By contrast, we
decided to use direct feedback, specifying concrete collaboration aspects that should be
improved, not limiting it to a speciﬁc activity or to the use of a particular supporting
application.

Regarding strategies for providing awareness information, the literature presents
several alternatives; some of them are based on automatic data capture and others require
a conscious user feedback [11]. Our proposal followed a mixed approach to generate
the awareness information, and therefore it considers both implicit and explicit feedback
of the users. Consequently, our design requires for the mobile application that embeds
the BAM to include some metrics collected automatically in an unobtrusive way (e.g.,
from application logs, smartphone-based sensing, etc.) and also information gathered
from  the  user  feedback  (e.g.,  self-assessments,  surveys,  etc.).  This  help  us  provide
awareness  about  a  wider  range  of  aspects,  integrating  multiple  data  sources  and
including both qualitative and quantitative measures of the learning experiences.

We have also identiﬁed in the literature three diﬀerent kinds of awareness that are
essential for supporting eﬀective collaborative learning, and therefore they should be
considered in our proposal: behavioural, cognitive and social awareness [12]. We have
also considered the motivational awareness as a forth awareness type to be included
because it usually has high relevance in these collaboration processes. Thus, our proposal
intends to contribute to the development of CSCL systems, providing a comprehensive
awareness that considers the following features:

A Behaviour Awareness Mechanism to Support Collaborative Learning

99

• Integral  Awareness.  The  visual  representations  consider  behavioural,  cognitive,

social and motivational information of the users.

• Aggregated  Information.  The  awareness  provides  representations  of  the  historic
collaborative and learning behaviour of the users, regardless of the collaborative
process or activity being supported. Thus, it is possible to identify behaviour patterns
of the users.

• Mixed Feedback. The proposed awareness includes a combination of implicit and

explicit feedback.

• Dynamic Information. It provides real-time awareness information that indicates the

current behaviour (and also its evolution) of the students.

• Multiple Data Sources. This awareness can represent information from several data
sources, such as surveys, self-reports, software logs and information collected auto‐
matically through the sensors of the mobile device.

• Explicit Feedback. BAM provides synthesized and direct awareness information that

indicates what needs to be improved in the collaboration or learning process.

3.2 Components of the Awareness Mechanism
The  proposed  awareness  mechanism  has  the  following  components:  the  Personal
Awareness Component (PAC) and the Social Awareness Component (SAC). Next we
describe these components.
Personal Awareness Component (PAC).  This element provides awareness about the
collaborative patterns of a speciﬁc student, and it represents several features of the
student’s behaviour. It is important to notice that these features reﬂect two important
aspects of CSCL: positive interdependence and individual accountability [13]. As a
result, the PAC component provides feedback on aspects related to the way in which the
students interact within diﬀerent teams, as well as personal features of these students
that aﬀect their collaboration and learning. Hence, the PAC is a simple visual represen‐
tation of both, (i) collaboration processes and outcomes, and (ii) motivational and social
aspects. In addition, this component of the awareness mechanism allows the students to
compare their own behaviour with the behaviour of their peers.

The collaborative behaviour features that should be represented in the PAC were
determined based on previous research work about quality assessment of computersupported 
collaboration processes [14–17]. We found seven basic dimensions related to
the eﬀectiveness of collaboration, and classiﬁed them according to the awareness types
provided by BAM. Nevertheless, we condensed such dimensions into ﬁve types, because
we considered that some of them were strongly related to each other. Consequently, the
resulting  ﬁve  dimensions  correspond  to  the  features  of  the  students’  collaborative
behaviour represented in the PAC component: communication, coordination, motiva‐
tion, performance and satisfaction. Table 1, summarizes the relationship between the
types of awareness considered in the proposal, the collaboration dimensions found in
the literature, the collaborative behaviour features and the metrics that can be used to
assign a value to these collaborative features.

100

E. Medina et al.

Table 1. Awareness types and collaborative behaviour features

Awareness types

Behavioural:
Informs about

learners’ activities

Cognitive:
Determines how well

the student’s
output meets the
expected values

Social:
Determines the func‐

tioning of the
group, as
perceived by the
collaborators
Motivational:
Represents the aware‐
ness of the student
motivation

Collaboration
dimension
Communication
Joint information

processing
Coordination
Interpersonal rela‐

tionship

Collaborative
behaviour feature
Communication

Coordination

Performance

Performance

Satisfaction

Satisfaction

Motivation

Motivation

Metrics

Based on knowledge and
information exchange,
and collaboration ﬂow

Presence of roles, planning
activities, time manage‐
ment, and reciprocal
interactions

Scoring of both individual

and group outcomes
(achievements)

Measurement of the

students satisfaction
about both, the collabo‐
ration process and
outcomes

Measurement of motiva‐

tional outcomes

In order to represent the five features of the students’ collaborative behaviour,
we divided the PAC visualizations into two subcomponents. The first one, the PACCBI 
 (Fig.  1a),  displays  an  overview  of  the  collaborative  learning  behaviour  by
combining the collaborative features through a global rating scheme, defined by the
Collaborative Behaviour Index (CBI). This index is calculated as the average of the
features represented (or CBI elements), and therefore it provides a representation of
the overall collaborative behaviour of a student. Once the PAC-CBI is displayed, the

Fig. 1. Design of the visual representations of the CBI and the collaboration features

A Behaviour Awareness Mechanism to Support Collaborative Learning

101

user can have more information through the visualization of the second subcompo‐
nent, the PAC-Features (Fig. 1b), which shows specific details about each collabo‐
rative feature included in the previous subcomponent.

As we can observe in Fig. 1a, the PAC-CBI subcomponent is represented with a
coloured circle, whose size correspond to the CBI value within a normalized scale from
0 to 100. The four concentric circles in the ﬁgure represent the theoretical ideal, the
normalized minimum, average and maximum values of the CBI for the overall group of
students considered in the representation. This allows us to provide awareness of the
behaviour of a student in comparison to the behaviour of his peers.

Figure  1b  shows  the  PAC-Features  subcomponent,  represented  using  a  radar
diagram. Thus, each feature of the students’ collaborative behaviour is depicted as a
vertex of a coloured pentagon. The pentagon size corresponds to the normalized value
of the features. Similar to the PAC-CBI, we depict four concentric pentagons; one regular
and the other three of variable size and shape. The regular pentagon represents the theo‐
retical ideal value expected for all the behaviour features. The pentagons of variable size
represent the normalized minimum, average and maximum values of the features for the
overall group of students. This enable a student to compare, for each feature, his own
performance to the one of his peers.

Notice that both the PAC-CBI and the PAC-Features visualizations represent the
behaviour of the speciﬁc student to whom the feedback is being displayed as colourﬁlled 
shapes (a circle and a pentagon, respectively).

Fig. 2. Example representations displayed for the Personal Awareness Component

Considering the previous design, Fig. 2 shows an example of the visual representa‐
tion of a student behaviour as displayed in the Personal Awareness Component. As we
can observe, it is composed by the CBI index (Fig. 2a), as a measure of the overall
collaborative behaviour, and also a detail of the ﬁve previously explained collaborative
dimensions (Fig. 2b).
Social Awareness Component (SAC).  This component provides social awareness
and proposes possible suitable collaborators (i.e., other students) to the user. In order

102

E. Medina et al.

to identify potential collaborators, we use the Multi-Dimensional Scaling (MDS)
method to represent students as points in a 2D space [18]. By performing MDS, the
values of the five collaboration features (5D space) of the CBI can be mapped into a
point in a 2D  space,  in  such  a  way  that distances  between  points are preserved.
Thus, we can represent, in the SAC, two students that have similar behaviour as two
points located at a short distance from each other. However, it could happen that
students having similar CBI, could also have very dissimilar values of the several
collaboration features that compose this index. In that case, the MDS also allows us
to represent such students as two distant points in the SAC; therefore, these students
will not be suggested as potential collaborators.

Moreover, we deﬁned two diﬀerent criteria to propose collaborators, depicted as the
“highly recommended collaborators” and the “other recommended collaborators”
areas of the SAC, respectively. The former includes at least one potential collaborator
that is located at the closest MDS distance from the represented student, and the latter
area includes the previous one and it has a range that covers at least a 20 % of the closest
potential collaborators. This percentage was decided on the basis of the Pareto’s prin‐
ciple or 80-20 rule [19], which states that “80 % of all eﬀects result from 20 % of all
causes”. Accordingly, we considered that 20 % of all possible collaborators can produce
the most signiﬁcant impact in the collaboration process. Figure 3 shows the design
proposed for the visualization of the SAC component.

Fig. 3. Design of the visual representations displayed by the Social Awareness Component

This method for suggesting collaborators is based on the correlation between values
of the CBI components for several students. Hence, we only propose collaborators with
similar behaviour. That is, only students who have similar values in the same collabo‐
ration features will be encouraged to collaborate. Two alternative methods for providing
this  feedback  are  the  following:  (i)  suggesting  as  possible  collaborators  only  those
students who have complementary behaviour or skills, and (ii) proposing collaborators
with both similar and complementary behaviour.

A Behaviour Awareness Mechanism to Support Collaborative Learning

103

Figure 4 shows examples of SAC representations, using these alternative methods.
Figure 4a represents the feedback provided to a student, where only those possible
collaborators with complementary behaviour are proposed. Thus, those students who
have high values of certain behaviour features will be suggested as potential collabora‐
tors of other students who have small values in such features and vice versa. By contrast,
Fig. 4b corresponds to the visual representation displayed to a student, where other
students with similar or complementary behaviour are suggested as collaborators. As
we can observe in both ﬁgures, we represent possible collaborators using two diﬀerent
colours, depending on whether we recommend them, because they have a behaviour
similar or complementary to the student that is receiving the feedback.

Fig. 4. Design of the visual representations of the Social Awareness Component

All  the  methods  proposed  to  recommend  collaborators  have  the  purpose  of
promoting collaboration among students, helping them to improve their own behaviour
and their learning experience. However, determining which method is the most appro‐
priate to fulﬁl such a purpose is beyond of the scope of this work.

4 Evaluation of the BAM Prototype

In order to evaluate the usefulness of the proposed awareness mechanism, we embedded
it in the Moodle learning platform used by the Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya
(UPC), in Spain, to support undergraduate courses. Therefore, this platform allowed us
to provide feedback visualizations to students, including both the PAC and SAC compo‐
nents.  The  Moodle  platform  was  also  used  to  collect  the  answers  of  the  students

104

E. Medina et al.

concerning the evaluation tasks and questionnaires. Next sections present the evaluation
methodology and the obtained results.

4.1 Evaluation Methodology
The evaluation process involved real students and the collaborative learning environ‐
ment that these students use every day to support their learning activities. Twenty four
students were recruited; all of them were third year students enrolled in the course
“Design of Applications and Services (DSA)” delivered at the Castelldefels School of
Telecommunications and Aerospace Engineering, of the UPC. We also used a real data
set from students of the DSA course to create the visualizations presented to the partic‐
ipants of the study.

The dataset included information from the students’ activities and opinions while
working within the formal learning environment as well as outside the classroom in an
informal and unplanned way. The data sources used to gather the information included
surveys and log ﬁles. The surveys investigated the students’ feelings, opinions and
behaviour during the course (both inside and outside the classroom). On the other hand,
the log ﬁles, collected from the learning supporting platform, had information about the
students’ activities and performance while working in the course project.

The  visualizations  used  in  the  study  consisted  of  three  diﬀerent  ﬁgures,  corre‐
sponding to the PAC-CBI, PAC-Features and the SAC components of our awareness
mechanism.

In order to evaluate the fitness of the awareness proposal for the intended appli‐
cation, we  asked  participants  to  complete  three  tasks;  one  for  each visualization
type. Consequently, for each representation the students had to perform a classifica‐
tion task, indicating whether those figures represented “poor”, “average” or “good”
student performance, or if some students represented in the SAC were “highly recom‐
mended”, “recommended” or “not recommended” as collaborators. For simplicity,
we named the classification tasks according to the rating levels that they represent
as “good”, “medium” or “bad”.

In addition to the classiﬁcation tasks, we asked participants to answer several ques‐
tions to assess the usability of the three components of the BAM. These questions were
taken from the Usability Perception Scale (UPscale) [20] and the Post-Study System
Usability Questionnaire (PSSUQ) [21]. Both tools were adapted to suit the purposes of
our study and formatted in a 5-point Likert scale. The resulting usability questionnaires
included questions designed to evaluate attributes of the visualizations, such as ease of
interpretation, learnability, usefulness, relevance and intention of use.

4.2 Evaluation Results
The prototype evaluation considered the analysis of the perceived usefulness of the
feedback model, and also its suitability to be used as part of the awareness support of
collaborative learning applications. The next sections present and discuss the obtained
results.

A Behaviour Awareness Mechanism to Support Collaborative Learning

105

On the one hand, the results from the classiﬁcation tasks were useful to provide
insights on how suitable the proposed awareness mechanism is to classify diﬀerent
learning behavioural patterns and suggest possible collaborators. Figure 5 shows the
results of the classiﬁcation tasks for the three elements of the BAM, which compose the
visual representations of our proposal. As we can observe, there is a high rate of correct
answers (94.91 % in average) for all the ﬁgures, which supports the suitability of our
feedback proposal.

Fig. 5. Results of the classiﬁcation tasks

On the other hand, results from the usability questionnaires helped us evaluate the
students’ perceived satisfaction concerning the information quality and its representa‐
tion. We also evaluated the usefulness and comprehensibility of the feedback. Figure 6
shows the results obtained from the UPscale that suggest very positive participants’
perceptions  about  the  usability  (70.42  %  in  average)  and  engagement  (65.69  %  in
average) of the three kinds of visualizations.

Fig. 6. Results of the UPscale questionnaire

106

E. Medina et al.

Similarly, the results from the PSSUQ questionnaire, depicted in Fig. 7, indicate
a high rate of participants’ satisfaction (76.31 % in average) for such visualizations.
Considering both usability questionnaires, it is important to notice that the results
revealed the highest satisfaction with the representation provided by the SAC compo‐
nent, followed by the PAC-Features and the PAC-CBI respectively. This means that
the SAC awareness component was the representation with the highest score in this
evaluation.

Fig. 7. Results of the PSSUQ questionnaire

5 Use Case

The awareness mechanism proposed in this paper can be integrated into collaborative
learning  applications  in  order  to  provide  visual  awareness  about  the  collaborative
learning behaviour of the users. As a proof-of-concept of such an integration, in this
section we present a use case that describes the implementation of a mobile collaborative
application that combines information from diﬀerent types of data sources, and displays
a dynamic and explicit feedback to users using the Behaviour Awareness Mechanism.
5.1 Data Sources
In order to generate the information required to provide awareness, we used data traces
collected from students’ behaviour during an academic semester. The traces corresponds

A Behaviour Awareness Mechanism to Support Collaborative Learning

107

to the participants in the previously mentioned DSA course, and they contain information
about the students’ actions while working in teams in a software development project.
More speciﬁcally, we gathered data from the following sources:
• Moodle platform. In order to collect information about the students’ performance,
communication and coordination, we used the Moodle regular services. Examples of
data traces collected through this mechanism are the number of tasks completed in
time, number of forum messages posted by the students, number of group tasks
submitted in time, and the individual and group grades.

• Trello web-based project management application. We used software logs from this
tool to generate information related to the coordination among the team members,
such as activity planning, collaboration ﬂow, group interaction and group hierarchy.
Examples of traces from this source are the number of tasks assigned, updated or
ﬁnished on time by each member.

• Online surveys to collect communication, satisfaction and motivation information.
We recorded the students’ answers to a number of surveys, including questions about
the collaboration with peers and the learning experience.

• GitHub web-based version control system. Logs from this software helped us obtain
data about certain aspects related to the team coordination and performance. Exam‐
ples of the collected information are the coding frequency and the number of pull
request and open issues of the team members.
In order to calculate the ﬁve collaborative behaviour features considered in this study,
we used diﬀerent combinations of data traces from diﬀerent sources. Hence, each feature
is calculated using speciﬁc traces, normalizing (from 0 to 100) the measurements that
each trace provides, assigning weights as multiplying factors depending on the number
of traces, and aggregating the resulting values. This process can be summarized through
the following equation:

(1)

where Featurex represents the collaborative feature to be calculated, n is the number of
data traces used, αn corresponds to the multiplying factors, and Tracen is the measure‐
ment from the particular data trace normalized from 0 to 100.

From the previous equation and for the considered feature, we obtain a value within the
range 0 – 100. As an example, let us consider that we use three data traces to calculate the
“Performance” collaborative feature of a specific student. Such traces include individual
and group grades of Moodle assignments and also the coding frequency as calculated by
GitHub. In this case, the resulting equation for performance would be the following:

(2)

108

E. Medina et al.

We must take into account that the measurements from each data trace can lay within
any possible range of values; therefore we must normalize the values of such metrics.
For example, the “GitHub coding frequency” indicates the number of items added by
a particular student to the software project repository. We can normalize the GitHub
coding  frequency, assigning  the values of  0 and 100  respectively  to  the theoretical
maximum and minimum number of expected additions for a speciﬁc time period. Thus,
0 and 100 correspond to a coding frequencies of 1 and 5 additions per week respectively.
Also, notice that in this case we assigned diﬀerent weights to the multiplying factors,
giving more importance to some measurements than to others. However, determining
the weight that should be given to each metric is not part of this research work.

5.2 Sample Visualizations
Using the information gathered from the previous sources, the application classiﬁes the
data according to the ﬁve collaborative features and combines it appropriately in order
to compute a value for each feature (within a normalized scale from 0 to 100). In addition,
the CBI index is calculated as the average of the features.

Finally, based in the features and CBI values of a speciﬁc student and his peers, the
application performs various MDS operations to represent, with a short distance, the
students that have similar behaviour. Figure 8 depicts an example of the visual repre‐
sentations of the students’ collaborative behaviour, provided by the Behaviour Aware‐
ness Mechanism, as shown in the students’ smartphones.

Fig. 8. Interface of the Behaviour Awareness Mechanism

6 Conclusions and Future Work

This paper proposes a Behaviour Awareness Mechanism (BAM) as a method to provide
visual feedback to support collaborative learning. It was initially proposed to support
undergraduate courses, but it could also be suitable to be used in other learning scenarios.

A Behaviour Awareness Mechanism to Support Collaborative Learning

109

In order to determine the usability and usefulness of this proposal, we conducted a
proof-of-concept in an undergraduate course at the Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya
(UPC), Spain. This evaluation  included a use case considering a group of students
working collaboratively during  a software development  project  and using  a mobile
collaborative application that implements the proposed awareness mechanism.

Although preliminary, the evaluation results indicate that the proposed awareness
mechanism is useful to provide aggregate feedback about the students’ behaviour and
performance  in  educational  contexts.  The  results  also  indicate  that  this  mechanism
represents  properly  the  diﬀerent  collaborative  learning  behavioural  patterns  of  the
students and also the suggestions of potential suitable collaborators for them. Although
these ﬁndings are still preliminary, they could help researchers and developers of CSCL
applications to provide dynamic, direct and holistic awareness on the learning patterns
and collaborative behaviour of the users.

Next steps in this research work involve a more in depth evaluation of BAM. This
will allow to improve the design of these visualizations and investigate how the provision
of feedback about the collaborative patterns may aﬀect behaviour and collaboration
dynamics of the students.

Acknowledgements.  This work has also been partially supported by Fondecyt (Chile), grants:
1150252; by the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation (MCI) and FEDER funds of the EU
under the contracts TIN2013-47245-C2-1-R, by the Community Networks Testbed for the Future
Internet (CONFINE), Large-scale Integrating Project: FP7-288535, and also by the Generalitat
de Catalunya as a Consolidated Research Group 2014-SGR-881.

References

1. Gress, C.L., Fior, M., Hadwin, A.F., Winne, P.H.: Measurement and assessment in computersupported 
collaborative learning. Comput. Hum. Behav. 26(5), 806–814 (2010)

2. Strijbos, J.W.: Assessment of (computer-supported) collaborative learning. Learn. Technol.

IEEE Trans. 4(1), 59–73 (2011)

3. Fransen,  J.,  Kirschner,  P.A.,  Erkens,  G.:  Mediating  team  eﬀectiveness  in  the  context  of
collaborative learning: The importance of team and task awareness. Comput. Hum. Behav.
27(3), 1103–1113 (2011)

4. Kwon,  K.,  Hong,  R.Y.,  Laﬀey,  J.M.:  The  educational  impact  of  metacognitive  group
coordination in computer-supported collaborative learning. Comput. Hum. Behav. 29(4),
1271–1281 (2013)

5. Kreijns, K., Kirschner, P.A., Jochems, W.: Identifying the pitfalls for social interaction in
computer-supported collaborative learning environments: a review of the research. Comput.
Hum. Behav. 19(3), 335–353 (2003)

6. Antunes, P., Herskovic, V., Ochoa, S.F., Pino, J.A.: Reviewing the quality of awareness

support in collaborative applications. J. Syst. Softw. 89, 146–169 (2014)

7. Wu, K., Vassileva, J., Sun, X., Fang, J.: Motivating wiki-based collaborative learning by
increasing awareness of task conﬂict: a design science approach. In: Baloian, N., Burstein,
F., Ogata, H., Santoro, F., Zurita, G. (eds.) CRIWG 2014. LNCS, vol. 8658, pp. 365–380.
Springer, Heidelberg (2014)

110

E. Medina et al.

8. Schneider, J., Börner, D., van Rosmalen, P., Specht, M.: Augmenting the senses: a review on

sensor-based learning support. Sensors 15(2), 4097–4133 (2015)

9. Phielix, C., Prins, F.J., Kirschner, P.A., Erkens, G., Jaspers, J.: Group awareness of social and
cognitive performance in a CSCL environment: eﬀects of a peer feedback and reﬂection tool.
Comput. Hum. Behav. 27(3), 1087–1102 (2011)

10. Nicol, D.J., Macfarlane-Dick, D.: Formative assessment and self-regulated learning: a model

and seven principles of good feedback practice. Stud. High. Educ. 31(2), 199–218 (2006)

11. Buder, J.: Group awareness tools for learning: Current and future directions. Comput. Hum.

Behav. 27(3), 1114–1117 (2011)

12. Bodemer, D., Dehler, J.: Group awareness in CSCL environments. Comput. Hum. Behav.

13. Wang, Q.: Design and evaluation of a collaborative learning environment. Comput. Educ.

27(3), 1043–1045 (2011)

53(4), 1138–1146 (2009)

14. Meier, A., Spada, H., Rummel, N.: A rating scheme for assessing the quality of computersupported 
collaboration processes. Int. J. Comput. Support. Collaborative Learn. 2(1), 63–86
(2007)

15. Chounta, I.-A., Hecking, T., Hoppe, H.U., Avouris, N.: Two make a network: using graphs
to assess the quality of collaboration of dyads. In: Baloian, N., Burstein, F., Ogata, H., Santoro,
F., Zurita, G. (eds.) CRIWG 2014. LNCS, vol. 8658, pp. 53–66. Springer, Heidelberg (2014)
16. Kahrimanis, G., Meier, A., Chounta, I.-A., Voyiatzaki, E., Spada, H., Rummel, N., Avouris,
N.:  Assessing  collaboration  quality  in  synchronous  CSCL  problem-solving  activities:
adaptation and empirical evaluation of a rating scheme. In: Cress, U., Dimitrova, V., Specht,
M. (eds.) EC-TEL 2009. LNCS, vol. 5794, pp. 267–272. Springer, Heidelberg (2009)

17. Lin, C., Standing, C., Liu, Y.C.: A model to develop eﬀective virtual teams. Decis. Support

Syst. 45(4), 1031–1045 (2008)

18. Buja, A., Swayne, D.F., Littman, M.L., Dean, N., Hofmann, H., Chen, L.: Data visualization

with multidimensional scaling. J. Comput. Graph. Stat. 17(2), 444–472 (2008)

19. Hardy, M.: Pareto’s law. Math. Intelligencer 32(3), 38–43 (2010)
20. Karlin,  B.,  Ford, R.:  The  usability  perception  scale  (UPscale):  a  measure  for  evaluating
feedback displays. In: Marcus, A., (ed.) Design, User Experience, and Usability. Design
Philosophy, Methods, and Tools. LNCS, vol. 8012, pp. 312–321. Springer, Heidelberg (2013)
21. Lewis, J.R.: Psychometric evaluation of the PSSUQ using data from ﬁve years of usability

studies. Int. J. Hum. Comput. Interact. 14(3–4), 463–488 (2002)

