Designing the Communications Infrastructure of

Groupware Systems

Sergio F. Ochoa1, Luis A. Guerrero1, David A. Fuller2, and Oriel Herrera3

1 Department of Computer Science, Universidad de Chile.

Blanco Encalada 2120, Santiago, Chile

{sochoa, luguerre}@dcc.uchile.cl

 2 Computer Science Department, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile.   

V. Mackenna 4860, Santiago, Chile.

dfuller@ing.puc.cl

 3 Informatics School, Universidad Católica de Temuco.

Manuel Montt 56 Temuco, Chile.

oherrera@uct.cl

Abstract.  In  the  development  of  groupware  systems  a  well  designed
communications  infrastructure  is  required,  due  to  the  high  complexity  of  the
communication scenario. Also, the design and implementation of coordination
and  collaboration  mechanisms  depends  on  the  communications  infrastructure.
Actually  there  are  no  well  known  guidelines  to  design  this  infrastructure.
Therefore, this paper proposes an architectural  pattern that helps carry  out the
design of this communications infrastructure. The proposed pattern supports all
the  groupware  systems  communication  scenarios,  taking  in  account  their
particularities.  This  pattern  has  been  used  in  the  design  of  several  groupware
applications and a groupware framework with very good results.

1   Introduction

A  collaborative  application  or  groupware  system  supports  the  work  performed  by  a
group of collaborators who pursue a common goal. For the attainment of this goal, the
groupware  system  must  provide  support  in  three  essential  aspects:  coordination,
collaboration,  and  communication,  better  known  as  the  three  groupware  Cs  [4].
Communication is the base for reaching coordination and collaboration.

Unlike distributed systems, collaborative applications share a common goal, which
has  to  be  reached  by  the  collaborators  through  the  coordination  of  their  individual
contributions and activities. Due to the existence of this common goal, communication
becomes  a  way  of  supporting  the  coordination  and  collaboration  mechanism  that
permits the group work. Therefore, the design of the communications infrastructure is
very important, since there are many other design aspects that depend on it [14]. These
are,  for  example,  awareness,  sessions  and  user  administration,  floor  control,  and
notifications.

Considering  the  essential  aspects  that  have  been  defined  by  Ellis,  et  al.  [4],  the
groupware systems should be designed using a layered architecture [2] (see Figure 1).
The reason is that each layer uses services from lower layers to do its work. This is

J.M. Haake and J.A. Pino (Eds.): CRIWG 2002, LNCS 2440, pp. 114–133, 2002.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2002

Designing the Communications Infrastructure of Groupware Systems         115

similar  to  what  happens  with  the  data  communication  protocols  or  with  operating
systems. In this scenario, each layer carries out a specific function and communicates
with the other layers through well-defined interfaces.

In  groupware  systems  the  communication  layer  should  be  in  charge  of  providing
the communication among the applications. The coordination layer should generate a
shared  vision  of  the  group  work.  It  coordinates  the  actions  that  are  carried  out
individually, and generates a consistent vision of the group activities. Finally, the two
superior  layers  correspond  to  the  definition  and  the  use  of  the  elements  that  permit
collaborative  work,  from  the  user  viewpoint.  Stratified  architectures  have  many
advantages, which have been widely discussed [2].

Fig. 1. Layers of a typical groupware system

Typically,  in  groupware  systems,  each  component  of  the  layers  two  and  three
should be designed and implemented over the defined communications infrastructure
(or  communication  layer).  Therefore,  the  implementation,  extension  or  modification
capacities  of  these  components  depend  greatly  on:  (a)  the  services  provided  by  the
communications infrastructure and (b) the quality of they. Therefore, the infrastructure
must  be  well  designed,  and  isolated  from  the  rest  of  the  collaborative  work  support
media.  In  this  way,  it  is  always  possible  to  add  new  services  to  the  communication
interface, incorporate new communication technologies, and maintain and improve the
existing infrastructure, without changing the superior modules of the application. To
achieve  this,  an  isolated,  modular,  and  flexible  communications  infrastructure  that
permits communication on all the typical scenarios is required.

Today,  there  are  no  communication  architectures  that  take  in  consideration  the
particularities  of  the  groupware  systems.  Therefore,  this  article  presents  an
architectural  pattern  called  CAGS  -Communication  Architecture  for  Groupware
Systemswhich 
 proposes  a  flexible  and  modular  architecture  to  manage  the
communication in groupware systems. This pattern takes in account the particularities
of this kind of communication which are described in the next section. Section 2 also
presents  the  communication  scenarios  of  groupware  systems.  Section  3  presents  the
related  works.  Section  4  describes  the  CAGS  pattern.  Section  5  shows  how  this
pattern supports the typical communication scenarios. Section 6 shows one example of
the application of this pattern. Section 7 presents the obtained results. Finally, section
8 states the conclusions of this work.

