Evaluating Collaborative Learning Processes

César A. Collazos1, Luis A. Guerrero, José A. Pino, and Sergio F. Ochoa

Department of Computer Science

Universidad de Chile

Blanco Encalada 2120, Santiago, Chile

{ccollazo, luguerre, jpino, sochoa}@dcc.uchile.cl

Abstract. Understanding and analyzing collaborative learning processes require
a  fine-grained  sequential  analysis  of  the  group  interaction  in  the  context  of
learning  goals.  Several  researchers  in  the  area  of  cooperative  work  take  as  a
success criterion the quality of the group outcome. Nevertheless, recent findings
are giving importance to the quality of the cooperation process itself. This paper
presents a set of indicators which main objective is to evaluate the collaborative
learning process.  We have defined an experiment with a tool instrumented to
gather  data  from  groups  working  in  a  simple  task.  This  data  is  then  useful  to
build the cooperation indicators, which in turn allow us to estimate the quality
of the work process.

1   Introduction

Dillenbourg  et  al.  claim  that  during  many  years,  theories  of  collaborative  learning
have been focused on how individuals work in group, and recently, they have focused
on  the  group  by  itself,  trying  to  establish  when  and  under  what  circumstances
collaborative  learning  is  more  effective  than  individual  learning  [7].  In  this  context,
some  independent  variables  have  been  identified  and  widely  studied:  the  size  and
composition  of  the  group,  the  nature  and  the  objectives  of  the  task,  the  media  and
communication  channels,  the  interaction  between  peers,  the  reward  system  and  sex
differences,  among  others  [1,7,27].  Recent  research,  however,  is  giving  emphasis  to
the study of collaboration processes and their support [3,4]. The work reported in this
paper concerns the collaboration processes.

Collaborative learning is a complex phenomenon, and studies are being conducted
from  many  different  analytical  levels  and  from  a  range  of  various  theoretical  and
methodological  perspectives.  Understanding  group  dynamics,  and  the  collaborative
processes  of  decision  making  and  learning  in  groups,  is  important  for  both  learners
and  instructors  in  collaborative  learning  programs.  Understanding  and  analyzing  the
collaborative learning process requires a fine-grained sequential analysis of the group
interaction in the context of learning goals. We may notice that supporting individual
learning requires an understanding of individual thought process, whereas supporting
group learning requires an understanding of the process of collaborative learning [23].

                                                          
1 On leave from FIET, Universidad del Cauca, Colombia.

J.M. Haake and J.A. Pino (Eds.): CRIWG 2002, LNCS 2440, pp. 203–221, 2002.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2002

204         C.A. Collazos et al.

Several researchers in the area of cooperative work take as a success criterion the
quality  of  the  group  outcome.  Nevertheless,  recent  findings  are  giving  more
importance to the quality of the “cooperation process” itself. Success in collaborative
learning subject matter means both learning the subject matter (collaborating to learn),
and learning how to effectively manage the interaction (learning to collaborate). The
knowledge acquisition process for systems supporting collaborative learning warrants
a closer look in light of this additional complexity [24]. Traditional instruction tends
to emphasize the product of the design and development process, but not the process
itself [19].

The  typical  evaluation  of  collaborative  learning  has  been  made  by  means  of
examinations or tests to the students to determine how much they have learned. That is
to  say,  a  quantitative  evaluation  of  the  quality  of  the  outcome  is  done.  Some
techniques  of  cooperative  learning  use  this  strategy  (e.g.  “Student  Team  Learning”
[24], “Group Investigation” [25], “Structural Approach” [17] and “Learning Together”
[13]).  Nevertheless,  little  investigation  has  been  done  to  evaluate  the  quality  of  the
collaboration process.

Taking  into  account  the  characterization  of  cooperative  learning  presented  by
Johnson & Johnson [16], we further develop the Index of Collaboration proposed by
Guerrero et al. [10], by defining a set of indicators. These indicators are intended to
help  in  the  evaluation  of  the  collaborative  learning  process.  We  have  defined  an
experiment with a tool instrumented  to gather data useful  to  build  these cooperation
indicators, which in turn allow us to estimate the quality of the work process.

This  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  In  section  2,  we  present  some  related  work.
Section  3  presents  the  Johnson  &  Johnson  characterization  of  collaborative  learning
processes. In section 4, we propose an evaluation instrument. Section 5 describes the
metrics we used. Section 6 introduces the cooperation indicators as well as a method
that  allows  us  to  evaluate  some  key  points  identified  in  the  phases  of  collaborative
learning.  Section  7  describes  the  experimental  design.  An  analysis  of  the  results  is
done in Section 8, and finally, section 9 presents some conclusions and proposals for
future work.

2   Related Work

Since  the  advent  of  computer  supported  collaborative  work,  the  investigation  of
computer  supported  collaborative  learning  has  been  of  major  interest.  It  has  been
conclusively argued that a focus on the process of collaboration is necessary in order
to  understand  the  value  of  working  together  with  peers  for  learning  [21].
Collaboration is the mutual engagement of participants in a coordinated effort to solve
a problem together [22].

Various  approaches  for  analyzing  group  learning  interaction  have  been  proposed.
Some  of  them  are  presented  below  to  have  an  overview  of  how  this  interaction  is
considered from different perspectives.

Barros  and  Verdejo  [3]  have  proposed  an  asynchronous  newsgroup-style
environment enabling students to have structured, computer-mediated discussions online.
 Evaluating the interaction involves analyzing the conversation to compute values
for  the  following  four  attributes:  initiative,  creativity,  elaboration,  and  conformity.
Katz  et  al.  [18]  developed  two  rule  learning  systems,  String  Rule  Learner  and

