Collaborative Scenarios to Promote Positive
Interdependence among Group Members

César A. Collazos*, Luis A. Guerrero, José A. Pino, and Sergio F. Ochoa

Department of Computer Science

Universidad de Chile

Blanco Encalada 2120, Santiago, Chile

{ccollazo,luguerre,jpino,sochoa}@dcc.uchile.cl

Abstract. Positive interdependence is the heart  of  collaborative  activities  that
define collaboration and transform group work into teamwork. To achieve positive 
 interdependence  among  students,  just  putting  them  in  group  and  telling
them to work together may not be sufficient. Previously, several types of positive 
 interdependencies  have  been  identified  for  unsupported  group  activities.
These kinds of interdependencies are now instantiated for the case of computersupported 
group learning. The examples we show in this paper are taken from
computer games and other tools we have developed to set students in a scenario
in which they must collaborate in order to succeed. This paper also presents diverse 
forms of structuring positive interdependence in software tools based on
the interface design to ensure that students think we instead of me.

1   Introduction

The  success  of  one  person  is  bound  by  with  the  success  of  others  in  collaborative
learning activities. This is referred to as positive interdependence. Interdependence is
meant  to  foster  cooperation  within  the  groups.  Students  need  to  have  a  reason  for
working together. Group tasks are collaborative when they structure positive interdependence 
among group members: a sink or swim together feeling and commitment to
the  group  goal.  Such  a  disposition  is  vital  for  successful  teams,  whether  in  sports,
drama, business,  hospital operating rooms or in academic  pursuits.  Positive  interdependence 
 is  considered  the  key  attribute  of  classroom  cooperation  [8].  It  can  take
many forms. Successful democracies are by definition cooperative since the conflicts
are  resolved  under  the  assumption  that  we  are  all  working  towards  the  good  of  the
society as a whole even if we disagree, sometimes strongly, on the means to promote
such good.

Johnson & Johnson have posted the statistical results of over 575 experimental and
100 correlational studies that were conducted by many researchers over various decades 
with different age subjects, in several subject areas, and in different settings [12].
These studies clearly demonstrate the positive effect that cooperative learning has on
student academic achievement and  social  development. One  of  the  issues  addressed
by this research is the type of interaction patterns found in cooperative, competitive,

                                                          
* On leave from FIET, Universidad del Cauca, Colombia.

J. Favela and D. Decouchant  (Eds.): CRIWG 2003,  LNCS 2806, pp. 356–370, 2003.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

Collaborative Scenarios to Promote Positive Interdependence among Group Members         357

and individualistic situations [12]. Positive interdependence creates promotive interaction.
  Promotive  interaction  occurs  as  individuals  encourage  and  facilitate  each
other’s efforts to reach the group goals (such as maximizing each member’s learning).
Negative  interdependence  typically  results  in  oppositional  interaction.  Oppositional
interaction  occurs  as  individuals  discourage  and  obstruct  each  other’s  efforts  to
achieve  something.  Individuals  focus  both  on  increasing  their  own  success  and  on
preventing anyone else from being more successful than they are. No interaction exists 
 when  individuals  work  independently  without  any  communication  with  each
other. Individuals focus only on increasing their own success and consider the efforts
of others as irrelevant. Each of these interaction patterns creates different outcomes.

Positive interdependence is the heart of collaborative activities that define collaboration 
and transform group work into teamwork. It is a key feature that has been emphasized 
 by  scholars  concerned  primarily  with  promoting  students’  academic
achievement and cognitive development [18,12], as well as research concerned with
students’  holistic  development.  Chickering  [7]  argues  that,  in  its  highest  form,  the
development  of  autonomy  does  not  simply  involve  the  development  of  freedom  to
choose and act independently of outside influences, but it also involves the development 
of freedom that recognizes one’s dependence and obligations to others.

As Johnson et al. [13] mention, the essence of a cooperative group is the development 
 and  maintenance  of  positive  interdependence  among  team  members.  Being  a
member of a group is not sufficient to promote higher achievement; there has to exist
positive interdependence  among  all  the  group  members.  In  a  cooperatively  learning
group,  this  means  learners  realize  that  they  are  connected  to  each  other  in  a  way
where  one  cannot  succeed  unless  everyone  succeeds.  Each  one  is  dependent  on  the
contribution of all the others within the group.

Group goals and tasks, therefore, must be designed and communicated to students
in ways that make them believe they  sink  or swim together. When  positive interdependence 
is solidly structured, it highlights that (a) each group member's efforts are
required for group success and (b) each group member has a unique contribution to
make to the joint effort because of his or her resources and/or role and task responsibilities 
[5, 20]. Doing so creates a commitment to the success of  group members as
well as one’s own and is the heart of cooperative learning. If there is no positive interdependence,
 there is no cooperation [13].

In spite of the vast amount of suggestions on how to promote positive interdependence,
 there are no guidelines on how to structure collaborative scenarios that promote
positive  interdependence  using  software  tools.  The  examples  of  software  interfaces
we  developed  are  structured  in  a  way  intended  to  promote  collaborative  activities
through several types of positive interdependences.

This paper shows some collaborative scenarios we have designed and implemented
in various software tools in order to promote this kind of interdependence. We point
out  the  basic  principles  of  positive  interdependence,  discussed  through  four  simple
game examples, where participants have to collaborate to reach a goal. In Section 2,
we  present  some  related  works.  Section  3  presents  a  set  of  software  tools  we  have
developed to support positive interdependences. Section 4 includes some examples on
how  to  structure  positive  interdependences.  Discussion  about  our  work  is  done  on
Section 5, and finally we present some conclusions in Section 6.

