CONCURRENCY AND COMPUTATION: PRACTICE AND EXPERIENCE
Concurrency Computat.: Pract. Exper. 2015; 27:2531–2546
Published online 12 December 2014 in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com). DOI: 10.1002/cpe.3450

SPECIAL ISSUE PAPER

Supporting personal security using participatory sensing

Pablo Carreño1, Francisco J. Gutierrez1, Sergio F. Ochoa1,*,† and Giancarlo Fortino2

1Computer Science Department, Universidad de Chile Beauchef 851, 3rd ﬂoor, Santiago, Chile

2DIMES, Università della Calabria Via P. Bucci, cubo 41C, 87036 Rende (CS), Italy

SUMMARY

Personal security is an open problem in large cities. After several attempts to reduce violence and crime,
there seems to be an agreement that preventive actions are the best way to address this problem. Trying
to help deal with that challenge, this paper proposes a mobile collaborative application, named Personal
Guardian, which is used by civilians while walking in urban areas. The application is focused on crime prevention 
and it implements participatory sensing to help people be aware of the risks that appear to exist in a
certain place at a certain time. Based on that information, citizens can take appropriate and on-time preventive 
actions. The system is supported by a human-centric wireless sensor network, and it is complementary
to the security solutions already used by public and private organizations. The system architecture and its
main components are described, and the main requirements and design decisions are also discussed. A preliminary 
evaluation of the solution was conducted to determine its strengths and weaknesses in terms of
quality of service. The obtained results indicate that the information feeding process is more relevant for
end-users than the unattended delivery of awareness information about their personal security. In addition,
this former capability does not require to be adjusted to the end-users’ context. Copyright © 2014 John
Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Received 21 January 2014; Revised 18 October 2014; Accepted 19 October 2014

KEY WORDS:

personal security; crime prevention; smart cities; participatory sensing; human-centric
wireless sensor networks; crowdsourcing; social computing

1. INTRODUCTION

Crime (e.g. assault, robbery, rape, vandalism, physical aggressions, and murders) is an open issue in
most countries around the world, particularly in large urban areas. Although government
organizations are continually working to improve the personal security of civilians, crime rate does
not seem to change too much [1, 2].

Today there seems to be a consensus that crime prevention is the best way to address this problem.
Unfortunately most solutions used to try reducing crime, like the use of surveillance cameras or
increasing the presence of security agents in the ﬁeld, are not robust enough in terms of crime
prevention for civilians [3–5]. For instance, these types of solutions do not have good scalability,
because it is not feasible to ﬂood a city with surveillance cameras or police personnel permanently
in duty protecting civilians. The cost and complexity of these solutions make them also not feasible,
even for developed countries.

Conscious of such situation, government organizations have involved citizens to a greater extent
during the last years in the process of crime prevention; e.g. through anonymous reports of crimes

*Correspondence to: Sergio F. Ochoa, Computer Science Department, Universidad de Chile, Beauchef 851, Santiago,
Chile.
†E-mail: sochoa@dcc.uchile.cl

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

2532

P. CARREÑO ET AL.

or suspicious activities. This has allowed civil authorities to increase the coverage area and the
monitoring capability of
still
bureaucratic (e.g. it requires to do a phone call or ﬁll a denounce form); therefore, it tends to be
slow and with a low participation rate.

[6]. However, citizen participation is

security organizations

Social networking services (SNS) provide a platform that allows people to participate through a
simple and direct way (e.g. through crowdsourcing or participatory sensing), in activities that are
relevant for them [7, 8]. Examples of such activities are diagnosing the vehicular trafﬁc, tagging
places in a physical environment, or rating the quality of service of a certain provider.

This article presents a tool that allows civilians to perform participatory sensing [9, 10] as a way to
help them tackle the stated security problem. The implemented solution is a mobile collaborative
system, named Personal Guardian (PG), which empowers ordinary citizens to collect and share
security information from their surrounding environment, using their mobile phones in an easy and
anonymous way. Considering the information provided by multiple participants, the PG system
performs an online diagnosis that allows civilians being aware of their current risk and personal
security level while they move through urban areas. Thus, they can take preventive actions in case
of need.

The system, which is supported by a human-centric wireless sensor network (HWSN) [11], is
complementary to regular solutions provided by other organizations. The functional and nonfunctional 
requirements of PG were established with the help of 31 people, who participated through
ﬁve focus groups.

Once implemented, the system was evaluated considering its service availability, performance,
information trustworthiness, and usability. The system showed good results in the four evaluated
aspects. Both the information feeding process and the usability of the application were indicated as
the most important features according to the end-users’ opinion. During such process we also
identiﬁed the need to provide context-aware mechanisms for delivering notiﬁcations to end-users, in
order to not bother them. Typically, people manage their personal security in different ways;
therefore, they want to receive notiﬁcations according to their personal level of apprehension to risk
situations.

Next section presents the related work. Section 3 brieﬂy introduces the concept of human-centric
wireless sensor networks and explains the architecture of the Personal Guardian system. Section 4
presents and discusses
the main requirements and design decisions made in the system
implementation. Section 5 describes the system evaluation process, in which formal tests were
conducted to determine the level of accomplishment of non-functional requirements (i.e. quality
requirements). It also discusses the obtained results. Finally, section 6 presents the conclusions and
the future work.

2. RELATED WORK

Personal security corresponds to the level of protection of a person from intentional criminal acts [12].
It is considered a core element of the well-being of individuals. The OECD Better Life Index [13]
reports that 4% of people in OECD countries say they have been assaulted or mugged over the past
12 months, where the average homicide rate in those countries is 2.2 murders per 100,000 inhabitants.
Criminologists recognize crime prevention strategies aimed at reducing the criminal opportunities
that arise from the routines of everyday life (e.g. improving surveillance of areas that might attract
crime by using closed-circuit television). These strategies are conceptualized under the notion of
situational crime prevention [14], which seeks to reduce opportunities for speciﬁc categories of
crime, by increasing difﬁculties to perform those actions and decreasing the associated risks and
rewards [15]. This crime prevention strategy requires that the potential victims be conscious of their
current risk situation, which seems to be the most unexplored and complex part of the problem.

Typically, people do not have supporting information about their personal security in many areas of
a city, even while living in that place. People can manage this lack of information in multiple ways.
Individuals can use their own experience to quantify the security level of the area in which they are
located, or they can use the experience of their contacts (e.g. friends in a SNS) or mainstream media

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Concurrency Computat.: Pract. Exper. 2015; 27:2531–2546
DOI: 10.1002/cpe

SUPPORTING PERSONAL SECURITY USING PARTICIPATORY SENSING

2533

(e.g. newspaper articles). For example, neighborhood programs and patrols can provide a friendly and
non-invasive support to members of a community, helping them feel better connected to their
neighbors. Thus, these programs contribute to reduce the neighbors’ risk of becoming victims of
frauds and scams, as well as other crimes.

Information is also usually managed by ofﬁcial sources from the government and other public
agencies, which publish studies and relevant statistics related to homeland security. Even if these
latter sources provide good references to estimate the inherent risk of a particular area, users may be
confronted to information provided in a complex format (e.g. in confusing or long documents), thus
being perceived as difﬁcult to understand. Particularly, this is a problem when individuals are faced
to quickly and accurately ﬁnd the inherent risk of a particular area at a particular time.

With the rise of social computing and ubiquitous technologies, Web applications have evolved from
serving users at an individual scale, to content-providers at a community scale. Moreover, these
services may actually go beyond the scope of a community and impact life in cities. There is a
current trend around the notion of smart city [16], which are characterized by an integration of
infrastructures and technology-mediated services,
learning for strengthening human
infrastructure, and the governance for institutional improvement and citizen engagement [17]. In
particular, our proposal aims to provide a mechanism for helping citizens take an active role in
crime prevention in a way that would allow transform ordinary cities into smart ones.

the social

Since the concept of smart city can be understood as a more user-centered evolution of other cityrelated 
concepts, it is natural to conceive the generation of ideas for innovative uses of information
technology driven by user participation or crowdsourcing [18]. One of these techniques is what
Burke et al. call participatory sensing [9]. This notion refers to ‘task deployed mobile devices to
form interactive, participatory sensor networks that enable public and professional users to gather,
analyze, and share local knowledge’. Currently, mobile devices (e.g. smartphones) embed multiple
sensors (e.g. motion sensor or accelerometer, gyroscope, and ambient light sensor), which have
made participatory sensing viable in the large-scale. Therefore, individuals and groups of people
actively participate in the collection of information for purposes ranging from crime prevention to
scientiﬁc studies [19].

Naturally, one of the critical factors to drive success in participatory sensing is the data collecting
process performed by users in order to generate collective intelligence. Lan et al. [20] proposed an
incentive scheme for a vehicle-based mobile surveillance system. The authors adopted a
participatory sensing strategy under the assumption that video surveillance is commonly used by the
police and private security ofﬁcers to determine and investigate crimes and other incidents.
Ballesteros et al. [21] studied a set of techniques for evaluating people security based on their spatial
and temporal dimensions. The authors show that information collected from geo-social networks can
be used to prevent crimes. Therefore, it seems to be clear that participatory sensing could be a good
strategy to address the stated problem; however the way in which we implement the supporting
solution can affect its usability and usefulness. Privacy and anonymity of the participating people
must also be considered in the design of these solutions. Wang et al. [22] propose the ARTSense
framework, which precisely deals with these issues. This framework consists of
two main
components: (1) an assessment algorithm to compute the trustworthiness of sensing reports, based
on anonymous user reputation levels and privacy-preserving contextual factors (such as location,
time, sensor mode, and traveling mode), and (2) an anonymous reputation management mechanism
to maintain the anonymity properties of the user, while also enforcing positive or negative user
reputation updates.

In order to try inferring criminally risky locations, we need to tackle the problem of accurately
characterizing event locations using crowdsourcing mechanisms. In that sense, Ouyang et al. [23]
developed a crowdsourcing-based approach, where users swipe on their smartphones’ touchscreens
in the direction of the event of interest. This particular kind of interaction can actually inspire the
design of applications that strongly rely in crowdsourcing and ubiquitous technologies. For instance,
applications for monitoring outdoor events, especially in densely populated public areas.

Finally, regarding the software architecture to support participatory sensing, Estrin [24] proposed
a layered architecture where the collected data requires a permanent
link between the sensors
and the server that stores and manages such information. The dependence of particular components

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Concurrency Computat.: Pract. Exper. 2015; 27:2531–2546
DOI: 10.1002/cpe

2534

P. CARREÑO ET AL.

(e.g. server or communication links) represents a serious restriction to address personal security
evaluation, because the system should be available when required. Duarte et al. [25] go a step
forward in the decentralization of the system architecture for participatory sensing and propose the
use of mobile units acting as an intermediary between servers and the sensors, which eventually can
support asynchronous communication among the network components. Finally, Ochoa and Santos
[11] go a step even further proposing a human-centric wireless sensor network, which includes all
the components of its predecessors, but also witness units that act as a repository of information for
users located in a particular area. These units considerably increase the system availability in terms
of information support
this is the alternative chosen to support
participatory sensing in the PG system.

to make decisions. Therefore,

3. THE PERSONAL GUARDIAN SYSTEM

Figure 1 shows the architecture of the human-centric wireless sensor network (HWSN) that supports
the PG system, which was initially introduced in [26]. HWSNs are heterogeneous in terms of
communication support and the type of nodes that can participate to them. The communication
support can be any that allows interaction between two or more nodes. The nodes are also

Figure 1. Layered architecture of the HWSN that supports the PG system.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Concurrency Computat.: Pract. Exper. 2015; 27:2531–2546
DOI: 10.1002/cpe

SUPPORTING PERSONAL SECURITY USING PARTICIPATORY SENSING

2535

heterogeneous, and they can play several roles, for instance they can be: regular sensors, human-based
sensors, mules, witness units, and actuators.

Regular sensors (RS) are instruments that measure a certain context variable and transmit its value to
other units. Examples of these sensors are GPS, temperature sensors, wearable sensors (also used as
Body Sensor Networks—BSNs [27, 28]), and also mobile devices able to detect the presence of
other devices in the area.

Human-based sensors (HBS) are people that use their senses (possibly complemented by regular
sensors, especially belonging to BSNs) to capture information about a certain variable of interest
(e.g. delinquency in a particular area), elaborate on it, and then produce knowledge that
represents the current value of that variable. HBS use a mobile device and a wireless network to
share the generated knowledge with other network nodes. Although the information provided by
HBS is not accurate, they represent the best option when the observed variable is not measurable
with a regular sensor but by means of virtual/logical sensors [29].

Mules (Mu) are mobile units that connect two or more disconnected networks. Examples of mules
are vehicles and passersby having a mobile computing device. These mules can also act as temporal
witness units (WU), i.e. network nodes that store the information shared by other nodes in a certain
area. These units are passive repositories of information that is relevant in the area where the WU is
located (e.g. about personal security). These units interact on-demand with the HBS, and they can
be implemented using almost any computing device with ad hoc communication and storage
capability; i.e. from tiny computing devices to servers. Cloud computing services are an interesting
way to implement WU, particularly if the information shared by them is highly demanded.

Actuators (Ac) are devices able to receive an order and perform an output action. Examples of these
devices may be a horn that emits a sound when an alarm order is received from the smartphone of a
HBS. It is important to remark that a same network node can play several roles at the same time.
For instance, an HBS can act as a sensor when its user shares information through the network, as a
Mu while the user move through a certain area, and as a WU when the user is in the neighborhood
where he/she lives. The roles of a network node in a certain instant are given by the services it
provides to other nodes and also to its user.

The architecture of the HWSN is composed of four layers: sensing, communication, information
persistence, and application. The lower layer is in charge of sensing the variables to be considered
in the process that is being supported; in our case, the evaluation of the personal security of people
in a certain area at a certain time. This layer considers HBS (e.g. passersby or neighbors) that use
smartphones and simple GUI forms to add information to the system in a loosely coupled way.
Figure 2.a shows two samples of these forms, through which the HBS indicates what event they saw
or suffered, when it happened, and how many times they have seen similar situations in that place.
Users indicate on a digital map the exact location of the events, and the GPS geo-references that
information.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 2. User interfaces of the Personal Guardian system.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Concurrency Computat.: Pract. Exper. 2015; 27:2531–2546
DOI: 10.1002/cpe

2536

P. CARREÑO ET AL.

The information captured by the sensors is then shared using the services provided by
communication units (e.g. WiFi or cellular antennas) or mules. These components are part of the
communication layer. The system considers a 3G connection with a server (WU) and WiFi-based
mobile ad hoc network that
is implemented using a High Level MANET Protocol (HLMP)
infrastructure [30]. Such an infrastructure also allows a network node (e.g. a HBS or WU) to detect
other nodes in the area and exchange information among them.

In order to increase the information availability in the area where it is required, the shared
information is temporarily or permanently stored in HBS and witness units located in the area,
as well as eventually in remote servers or on cloud computing infrastructures [31]. These
components are part of the information persistence layer. This layer considers the participation of
WU and HBS. Two particular WUs play a key role in this system (Figure 1): the system server
and the Facebook server. The ﬁrst one stores and makes the fusion of the security information
of every area, considering the reports features and the reputation of the users reporting the
incidents. The Facebook server is used to authenticate the users and to retrieve the users’ contact
list, in case that an ‘ask for help’ message is delivered. The HBS (i.e. HLMP network nodes)
participating in this layer act as temporal repositories of the security information of the area
where they are located. They exchange information with other nodes through the HLMP
infrastructure.

Finally, in the application layer we can see the information about the user vulnerability. Figure 2.b.
shows the user current location and the records of incidents in an area of 200 meters around him/her.
Figure 2.c. shows the information that the PG system delivers to the user when a risk overcame a
certain threshold. The colors used to represent the risk level of a user follow the same semantics as
a semaphore: green means ‘ok’, red means ‘dangerous situation’, and yellow means ‘caution’. The
application also allows ﬁltering the incident records and shows only those added by Facebook
contacts of the user. Several awareness mechanisms (from ringtones to tactoons) were implemented
to notify the user about his/her current risk level. The current implementation of Personal Guardian
determines the risks of a user to car theft and vandalism, regular delinquency (robbery and assaults),
drugs trafﬁc, and disturbance (physical violence).

4. SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS AND DESIGN DECISIONS

The design of the PG system considered several functional (FR) and non-functional requirements
(NFR) to try ensure that it would usable and useful in a real scenario. In a ﬁrst stage, these
requirements were obtained and validated through a focus group with twelve potential users of the
system. Then, the completeness and suitability of the obtained requirements were evaluated and
adjusted by three experienced developers of mobile collaborative applications. This process only
considered the main requirements of the system; i.e. those that are part of the application core. Next
we describe the main functional and non-functional requirements that were deﬁned in this process,
and also the design decisions made to address them.

4.1. Functional requirements

Although the list of functional requirements (FRs) involved in the development of this system is quite
long, next we present the most important ones from a usability and usefulness point of view. These FRs
can be understood as services that the application must provide to the end-user (i.e. the citizens) or to
other software services. For each FR we indicate the design decisions made to address it.

(cid:129) Map navigation. The system must provide geo-referenced visual information, because warnings
are typically related to a particular place or area of the city. Therefore the user should be able
to navigate the map of the area, using several zoom levels. The use of geo-referenced tiles to
manage the map positively impact usability and performance of the system [32]. Moreover, this
service must count on positioning capabilities, through the use of GPS or others mechanisms.
Relevant (i.e. context-aware) information must be clearly identiﬁable at a ﬁrst glance; e.g. using
blinking icons or bright colors.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Concurrency Computat.: Pract. Exper. 2015; 27:2531–2546
DOI: 10.1002/cpe

SUPPORTING PERSONAL SECURITY USING PARTICIPATORY SENSING

2537

(cid:129) Device positioning. In order to determine the personal security of people, the system needs to
know its users’ location. Since a risk evaluation requires a coarse-grain position of the user, in
most cases the use of GPS is a good option to make a diagnosis of the area. In the case of indoor
locations, the use of the last known outdoor position of the user could be enough to determine
his/her vulnerability level. Although using just GPS can lead the system to make some error when
the user is indoors, this strategy considerably reduces the complexity to implement services that
perform indoor positioning. Devices not having positioning capabilities can request such information 
to neighbor nodes (e.g. HBS, mules or witness units) using ad hoc communication services;
for instance a mobile ad hoc network. Using positioning by nodes proximity is also an option that
can be used in case of need.

(cid:129) Communication. The information provided by the crowd should be shared as soon as possible to
beneﬁt the participants and to reduce the impact of possible malicious interventions affecting the
trustworthiness of the shared data. In both cases, counting on communication among participants
is mandatory. Such communication can be performed using ad hoc or infrastructure-based communication 
systems, or a combination of them. Typically, the former helps address information
sharing in a small area, and it is usually enough to support the diagnosis of pedestrians’ personal
security. The latter covers larger areas and provides a wider bandwidth that properly allows
supporting the crowd activities. This communication modality helps diagnose the personal security 
of an ample range of users, from pedestrians to car drivers. Although the system implements
loosely coupled data links (i.e. the PG system does not require a permanent data link with the
server or other nodes), counting on stable communication when required helps the application
be more effective in both, the diagnosis and alarm delivery processes.

(cid:129) Device tracking. This requirement allows users to monitor the whereabouts of a remote user on a
map. It is typically required when the monitored person is asking for help to someone else, e.g.
friends or family. The tracking capability can be implemented using device positioning and communication 
(e.g. detecting the cellular antenna that is being used by the monitored person to be
connected with the system); and the means for monitoring the user movements can be implemented 
using the user’s personal contacts from a SNS (like Facebook).

(cid:129) Visual handheld-based feeding. If we want that many people report vulnerability (in terms of
crime) of city areas, the reporting process should be easy and fast. This process can be accomplished 
using handheld devices that are easy to transport, deploy, and use. Indeed, most of them
have GPS that allows users to geo-reference their vulnerability reports. The information of these
reports should be locally stored into the device, and then appropriately transferred to a WU to
avoid delays in the feeding process. The system server is the main repository (i.e. WU) of shared
information, and it is the node in charge of determining the accuracy and trustworthiness of each
information piece. People reporting information about vulnerability are HBS that use their senses,
knowledge, and experience to determine that a place or area, under certain conditions, is vulnerable 
to speciﬁc types of crimes. The use of visual information during the feeding process usually
contributes to reduce the users’ error rate.

(cid:129) Data sharing. Data sharing beneﬁts the system users and reduces the impact of malicious interventions.
 The ad hoc and infrastructure-based communication units play a key role in this process.
Moreover, the presence of MUs and WUs typically contribute to enhance the data sharing among
network nodes, which positively impacts on the availability, performance, and trustworthiness of
the whole system. Autonomous agents can be used to share data in an unattended way; thus, we
avoid distracting the users and increase the system ubiquity. The shared information should be in a
standard format that allows other nodes to interpret it correctly.

(cid:129) Warnings/alarms delivery. The main goals of the system are to diagnose the user current situation
and deliver appropriate notiﬁcations in order to make him/her aware of his/her risk level. The
diagnosis process and also delivery of notiﬁcations are in charge of autonomous agents to avoid
distracting the end-user. The evaluation of users’ vulnerability requires geo-localization (GPS)
to determine the users’ position, and awareness mechanisms to inform people about their possible
risks. In case that a user asks for external help (e.g. friends or family), the system would require
connecting to a social networking service to retrieve the user’s personal contact information,
and deliver the alarms accordingly. The mechanisms used to deploy the alarm should be

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Concurrency Computat.: Pract. Exper. 2015; 27:2531–2546
DOI: 10.1002/cpe

2538

P. CARREÑO ET AL.

context-aware. For instance, the smartphone can vibrate instead of sounding to indicate that the
user is already in a dangerous area. Thus, the application avoids calling someone’s attention.

4.2. Non-functional requirements

The non-functional requirements (NFR) establish restrictions to the services provided by the software.
The quality of these services depends on how well these requirements are addressed. Typically, every
NFR should have a minimum acceptance level, which should be achieved (during a formal test) by the
system services. NFRs are also transversal; this means that they affect every service of the system.

(cid:129) High availability. The system should be available as well as the supporting information that it
provides, independently of the possibility to count on access to the system server. For that
reason, the geographical information of an area and its vulnerability information should be
managed using a loosely coupled schema. This means that a mobile device running the system
must locally keep all the information of the area where it is located. Periodically the device
synchronizes its information with the server (i.e. WU) in charge of the information persistence,
and eventually downloads information of new areas that are now relevant, if the user moved to
other places. If the system does not have access to a WU, it evaluates the user vulnerability
based on the local information. Eventually, if it does not have enough information to determine 
the user vulnerability, it can ask to neighbor devices (i.e. HBS or Mules) for additional
information or for a complete vulnerability diagnosis. Interactions with other network nodes
require counting on access to infrastructure-based or ad hoc communication units. Since the
system availability also depends on the availability of the device where it runs, the target
device should be mobile and be with the user most of the time. Considering these restrictions,
a handheld device, like a smartphone or a small slate, seems to be the most appropriate option
for deploying the system. The information availability should be measured from the end-user
point of view; therefore, autonomous agents are required to diagnose an area and eventually
deliver context-aware notiﬁcations.

(cid:129) Quick access. If the user wants to get personal security information on-demand, the access to such
information should be fast, where the most relevant information must be shown ﬁrst. In that sense,
the use of visual information is usually the best alternative to deliver information to the user. The
type of actions for crime prevention that can be taken by the user depends on how well this visual
information can be captured in a ﬁrst glance. Moreover, it is important to use a mobile device with
fast boot, like a smartphone or a slate. The use of a loosely coupled data link strategy, which prioritizes 
the use of locally stored map tiles, also contributes to have a quick access to the supporting
information.

(cid:129) Proactivity. The system should contribute to prevent crime by autonomously informing the user
about possible vulnerability situations that it identiﬁes. For that reason, the system should be active 
at all times, monitoring and evaluating the personal security context of the user. Usually, this
functionality is implemented through an autonomous agent. A context-aware alarm (e.g. visual
messages, ringtones or tactoons) should be triggered every time that a vulnerability situation exceeds 
a certain threshold. Depending on its criticality, more than one alarm could be sent not only
to the local user but also to his/her closest contacts. The way in which these alarms are deployed
on the mobile device depends on the user preferences.

(cid:129) Information trustworthiness. When the quality of a service depends on the quality of the information 
that it provides, information trustworthiness becomes a critical requirement. Although there
are several strategies to address this requirement, recent research in participatory sensing indicates
that crowdsourcing and reputation are usually a good combination to deal with this issue [33, 34].
Data held by other network nodes and WUs can also contribute to increase the trustfulness of the
information. In order to help increase the information trustworthiness, users can vote or add annotations 
only if they are located near to the place they are referencing. Thus, we avoid that people
spread personal security information everywhere. Autonomous agents running in the system
server periodically reevaluate the votes, considering the reputation of the voters, in order to determine 
vulnerability of particular areas. The aggregated information about vulnerability is shared
on-demand with the mobile nodes.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Concurrency Computat.: Pract. Exper. 2015; 27:2531–2546
DOI: 10.1002/cpe

SUPPORTING PERSONAL SECURITY USING PARTICIPATORY SENSING

2539

(cid:129) Understandable information. The system must notify to its users as soon as possible if they are in
risk. Therefore, the information that the system provides them should be easy to understand by
average users at a ﬁrst glance. In that sense, the use of visual information and voice messages
seem to be appropriate to address this requirement in most work contexts. In the case of messages
indicating physical locations, the use of geo-referenced visual information (e.g. a map or a radar
view) is usually the easiest way to provide an effective communication to end-users. Provided that
effective communication requires that input and output channels be aligned, awareness mechanisms 
are usually required.

(cid:129) Interoperability. The system should be able to exchange data and requests services to other devices,
 as a way to provide more accurate and on-time advices/alarms to end-users. This interoperability 
requirement has a well-known solution, which consists on using data and service
representations that adhere to standard formats (e.g. XML for data, and Web services to implement 
functionality). The interaction between nodes will require counting on infrastructure-based
or ad hoc communication units.

4.3. System requirements versus design decisions

Figure 3 summarizes the relationships among the main FR, NFR, and design decisions involved in the
system. These relationships also indicate whether a design element is mandatory, optional or not
required to implement a certain requirement. The type of relationship was established according to
the opinion of both, the end-users that participated in the focus groups, and the developers of mobile
collaborative applications.

In Figure 3 we can see that the information feeding process is highly relevant for the users.
Particularly, the visual handheld-based feeding and the data sharing processes are the most needed
for them. The access to the shared information on-demand through the map was also required (map
navigation); however, the proactive delivery of warnings and alarms was considered invasive by
various users.

In every service, the users also indicated three non-functional requirements as being the most
relevant ones: information availability, trustworthiness, and the quick access to it. Other NFR such
as information understandability were not too relevant for the users, because they assumed that the
system cannot be put into production if it does not properly address this aspect of the information

Figure 3. Correspondence matrix: requirements vs. design decisions.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Concurrency Computat.: Pract. Exper. 2015; 27:2531–2546
DOI: 10.1002/cpe

2540

P. CARREÑO ET AL.

delivery. The proactivity of the system was also few relevant for the users due the previously
mentioned reason; i.e. they prefer to access the information on-demand and do not receive regularly
the notiﬁcations of the system.

Figure 3 also shows various design decisions that can contribute to reach several FR and NFR. The
most relevant ones are: the support for performing loosely coupled work, the use of autonomous agents
for information processing, the use of positioning for determining the information relevance, the
provision of awareness mechanisms to help users understand this information relevance, and the
visual
representation of such information. These design components must be addressed by
developers of mobile applications that support participatory sensing.

5. SYSTEM EVALUATION

In this stage we have to determine if the system accomplishes with the FRs and NFRs speciﬁed in the
previous section. In case of the FRs, the evaluation is objective and has a binary result; i.e. the system
accomplishes or not with a certain requirement. This evaluation type is replicable; therefore, the
obtained results can be veriﬁed using low effort.

In case of the NFRs, their accomplishment is represented as a value in a range, which usually requires
the interpretation of system users and experts to determine if that quality of the product is acceptable to
address the problem. Trying to reduce the subjectivity of these tests, it is recommended to determine a
minimum acceptance level [35]; however, such a value is also subjective.

After evaluating the Personal Guardian system, the engineers in charge of the process determined
that the application accomplished with all FRs. This does not mean that the system is usable and
useful for end-users. In fact, determining usability and usefulness requires also that all NFRs of the
system core achieve at least the minimum acceptance level. Therefore, the next sections describe the
evaluation processes performed to determine the accomplishment level of these NFRs.

5.1. System availability

The availability of the system, in terms of the services that it provides, should be high. Therefore, each
mobile device running the system should work autonomously instead of being connected to a remote
resource. Thus, the system increases its performance and reduces the dependencies of remote units.
Contrarily, software systems implementing participatory sensing must always try to use information
as complete and updated as possible in order to generate and deliver appropriate notiﬁcations. This
means that the system should try to work connected to the server, which is the node where the
information is more complete and updated. Therefore, the system availability should be evaluated in
these two scenarios.

Trying to determine this two-fold feature of the system, we evaluated the availability and
performance of the main services provided to end-users, and then the information availability
considering the whole information available in the network (i.e. in the HWSN). For the ﬁrst case,
we created a simulated area of 300 meters by 300 meters. Twenty annotations were available in the
server for such area. After downloading these annotations to a smartphone running the PG system,
we added ﬁve more annotations to the server and then we evaluated the main systems services in
three different situations: when the system is connected to the server, when connected to a HBS
(a neighbor with additional information of the area) and when it is disconnected. Ten times the
person using the application accessed the study area. We simulated these accesses at different days
and times to see the appropriateness of the notiﬁcations delivered by the system. Table I summarizes
the main results.

As a ﬁrst step, we manually identiﬁed the information that the system must show to the user and also
the notiﬁcations that should be delivered, according to the annotations stored in the system and
depending of the day and time at which the area is accessed. Then, we compared such data with the
information actually displayed by the application during the simulations. The results indicate that the
information was correctly shown in the three cases according to the local information stored in
the smartphone. However there was an 8% (average) of outdated relevant information in the ﬁrst

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Concurrency Computat.: Pract. Exper. 2015; 27:2531–2546
DOI: 10.1002/cpe

SUPPORTING PERSONAL SECURITY USING PARTICIPATORY SENSING

2541

Table I. Evaluation results of the local services.

Service/work scenario

Connected to the server

Connected to a HBS

Disconnected

% of deployed notiﬁcations
% of outdated relevant information
% of appropriate notiﬁcations
Detection time of the obsolete information
Duration of the data synchronization

100%
8%
98%
5–6 s
8–13 s

100%
10%
94%
3–5 s
5–7 s

100%

–
94%
–
–

work scenario, due to the new annotations that we added to the server after the data synchronization
process. Because of the same reason, such a percentage was 10% when the node was connected to a
HBS, which was already updated and also had new annotations. The presence of outdated
information had a low impact on the appropriateness of the notiﬁcations delivered to the user. If we
consider only the local
the percentage of appropriate
notiﬁcations was 100%. Therefore, the appropriateness of the notiﬁcations delivered by the PG
system depends only on how update is the local information.

information stored in the mobile unit,

In this setting, the system requires less than 6 s to identify outdated relevant information and also to
determine the percentage of such information portion. If that portion is over 20%, the mobile unit
triggers a synchronization process for updating its local information and thus making appropriate
diagnoses and notiﬁcations. The data synchronization process for a speciﬁc area took up to 13 s
(mainly because of communication delays) and the diagnose process took between 1 and 2 s. The
delivery of notiﬁcations can be considered as almost instantaneous after the system has a diagnosis
of the area. Therefore, considering the current setting (i.e. a user,
the server and a neighbor
participating in the HWSN), in the worst case the mobile user would receive notiﬁcations with
approximately 20 s of delay and a 94% of accuracy. Clearly the performance of these processes is
inversely proportional to the accuracy of the results that they obtain.

The periodicity used by the system to re-check the current vulnerability of the user is conﬁgurable,
and it typically depends on the speed to which the user is moving. For car drivers that time could be
15–30 s while for walking people usually is 60–90 s. A higher periodicity for re-checking makes the
system more proactive, but it increases the energy consumption.

The results shown in Table I are just illustrative. The performance of the system should not change
too much, given that the reference points for data synchronization and obsolescence calculation are
always the server or the neighbor HBS that are to one hop of distance. However, there could be an
important degradation of the diagnosis made by a mobile unit if the nodes belonging to the HWSN
do not report frequently their local annotations to the server. Summarizing, the loosely coupled data
link contributes to increase the information and services availability, but each node must also
perform frequent data synchronization processes with the server to avoid degrade the accuracy of
the diagnoses and notiﬁcations made to the end-users.

5.2. Delay to access the information and services

In the previous section we show part of the performance results of the system. Those results have a low
dependence on the structure of the HWSN, because the system services mainly uses local information.
Additionally to these tests, we have also measured the times involved in various other operations; most
of them involving speciﬁc actions of the end-user. These operations were repeated ten times each and
involved three users. Table II summarizes the average values of the obtained results. The standard
deviation in all cases was low.

These numbers indicate low delays to access the system services and information, which make us to
expect that the solution provides a ‘quick access’ (i.e. it overcomes the minimum acceptance level for
this NFR).

5.3. System proactivity

Considering the problem that the application is trying to address, and the fact that the focus of this
application is crime prevention, it is clear that the system proactivity is mandatory. In section 5.1 we

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Concurrency Computat.: Pract. Exper. 2015; 27:2531–2546
DOI: 10.1002/cpe

2542

P. CARREÑO ET AL.

Table II. Delays to access system information and services.

Operation

Average delay

System start-up time
Delay in deploying a notiﬁcation having a diagnosis
Delay in deploying the visual information
Delay in visualizing the after a zoom-in/out operation
Delay in opening the vote service
Delay in recording and computing a vote
Delay in opening the annotation form

1 s

<0.5 s
<1 s
<2 s
<2 s
<3 s
<2 s

the system triggers all notiﬁcations, and that

these notiﬁcations are appropriate,
indicated that
according to the local information of the mobile unit being studied. In section 5.2 we indicated that
the time to deploy a notiﬁcation is less than 0.5 s once the system has a diagnosis of the area in
which the user is located. The time to diagnose or recalculate a diagnosis is 1–2 s the setting
speciﬁed in section 5.1. Therefore in the worst case in such a setting, the system will spend around
3 s to notify the user about a vulnerability situation based on the local information. This time
involves 2 s for re-diagnosing, and 1 s for the notiﬁcation delivery and (eventually) information
deployment.

As mentioned in section 5.1, we have also to add the periodicity speciﬁed by the user for rechecking 
his vulnerability situation, which can affect considerably the system proactivity. However,
if the time between re-checking points degrades the system proactivity, the only responsible for that
situation will be the user, given that the system adds no more than 3 s of extra delay to each
notiﬁcation.

5.4. Information trustworthiness

In order to determine how trustworthy the information provided by the Personal Guardian system can
be, we used the NS-3 simulator [36] to create a HWSN composed by the server (i.e. a WU) and 100
HBS. We simulated a voting process in which the HBS indicated if a piece of information about the
vulnerability of a place is correct or incorrect. A vote per minute is added to the system, and after
each vote the system recalculates the vulnerability of that place. If the system performs a wrong
diagnose, because there are nodes that lie (non-trustworthy nodes), then we determined the time
required by the system to make a right diagnose. We have called to such a metric correction delay.
All voters had the same reputation and the order in which the nodes deliver their vote was random.
Figure 4 shows the obtained results (average) after then simulation rounds.

Figure 4. Usability evaluation results.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Concurrency Computat.: Pract. Exper. 2015; 27:2531–2546
DOI: 10.1002/cpe

SUPPORTING PERSONAL SECURITY USING PARTICIPATORY SENSING

2543

These results show that the HWSN requires at least a 60% of trustworthy nodes (i.e. nodes that do
not lie) to reach a right diagnose after a wrong one. The time spent by the system to make such a
correction depends on the percentage of trustworthy nodes. Correcting a wrong diagnose in a
favorable scenarios (e.g. with over 90% of trustworthy nodes) could be up to ten times faster than in
an unfavorable scenario (e.g. with 60–65% of trustworthy nodes). After each voting the reputation
of the nodes is updated; therefore the trustworthy nodes increase their reputation, contrarily to the
liar nodes. This means that the opinion of the trustworthy nodes during the next voting will be
stronger, which reduces the times required to correct a wrong diagnose.

In this application scenario we can expect that most nodes do not lie, because there is a common
interest for counting on right information to determine the people current vulnerability. Moreover,
when an interest point reaches a right diagnosis involving high participating, it is difﬁcult that liar
nodes can change it. This makes us to expect that the system accomplishes with the minimum
acceptance level to be useful in practice.

5.5. System usability

The information understandability was evaluated as part of the system usability. This evaluation
involved end-users aged between 18 and 35 years old that extensively use smartphones and SNS. As
an additional constraint, we limited the evaluation to the city of Santiago, Chile, in order to have a
common geographical context within the group of evaluators. The usability attributes considered in
the evaluation were the system learnability and the user satisfaction; and the assessment techniques
used were questionnaire, and observation and thinking aloud [37].

The sample was formed by following typical recommendations in usability testing [38, 39]. On one
hand, the questionnaire consisted of items graded in a 5-point Likert scale that intended to assess
satisfaction and learnability. It was applied to 20 evaluators once they have used the application. On
the other hand, we applied the observation and thinking aloud technique to a group of ﬁve
evaluators. We assigned them a set of tasks to be performed by interacting with the application and
we noted relevant observations regarding their performance (i.e. task easily completed, completed,
completed with difﬁculty, or not completed) and user experience (i.e. spontaneous reactions
indicating frustration and/or ease of use). Figure 5 shows the median score assigned to each item in
the questionnaire.

According to the evaluators, the current design of the application allows an easy navigation.
However, the information architecture (at the user interface) can be improved, as the evaluators
consider that some elements are not intuitive, as well as the logic behind the organization of some
visual elements. A plausible explanation to this latter result may be linked to the lack of familiarity
of evaluators with social applications speciﬁcally designed to provide awareness in security matters.
Regarding the esthetics and graphical design of the application, the evaluators liked this particular
point, as the fonts and used colors are sober and try to enhance the value of the information that is

Figure 5. Usability evaluation results.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Concurrency Computat.: Pract. Exper. 2015; 27:2531–2546
DOI: 10.1002/cpe

2544

P. CARREÑO ET AL.

Figure 6. Perceived complexity for task achievement.

presented in the interface. Moreover, the evaluators praised the content of the application, as they
consider it to be relevant and useful in the context for what the service is provided.

Next we present the results of the evaluation using the observation and thinking aloud techniques.
Figure 6 shows the median value for the perceived ease or difﬁculty for achieving the proposed tasks:
(1) voting for a particular place, (2) understanding the presented results, and (3) reading comments.

According to the results, the three proposed tasks were perceived as easy to achieve. Regarding the
spontaneous comments stated by the evaluators, there was no difﬁculty for integrating Facebook as a
SNS working with the application. However, two users showed frustration when deciding how to cast a
vote for a particular spot. This was partly due to a problem when launching the application, since it
displayed sometimes a spot that was not known or recognized beforehand by the evaluators.

This was improved in the next iteration in the development life cycle of the application. The system
performance was not formally evaluated in this stage, but it was indirectly evaluated through the
system usability. No evaluator mentioned this issue, which probably means that
the system
performance was considered as appropriate.

Concerning the interoperability aspect, which is the last NFR considered in the system, it was not
formally evaluated. However, such a requirement was addressed through the use of information
representation in XML and implementation of services in WS format. Thus adhering to well-known
standards for data and services representation we tried to address this last NFR.

6. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

Crime is still an open issue in most countries, particularly in large urban areas. The current mechanisms
to provide personal security are not particularly focused on helping potential victims to easily
determine their inherent risk to crimes in real-time. Therefore, their capability to take appropriate
and on-time preventive actions is diminished. Trying to help address that problem, this article
proposes a participatory sensing system (named Personal Guardian—PG) that complements the
already used solutions by government organizations. The PG system is a mobile collaborative
application based on a human-centric wireless sensor network, in which most nodes are humanbased 
sensors (represented by civilians using smartphones).

This system uses participatory sensing, human-based sensors and regular sensors to collect
information from the ﬁeld, and utilizes several awareness mechanisms to inform the users about
their current personal security risks. The information provided by the system can also be used to
build a spatiotemporal view of crime (e.g. by incident type) that allows security organizations to
understand its evolution and improve the prevention/ﬁght actions.

The functional and non-functional requirements of the system were determined with the help of endusers 
and also experienced developers. These requirements indicate that the feeding process is the most
important feature for the users. Moreover, they prefer to access on-demand the information provided by
the system; i.e. the proactive notiﬁcations were not valuable for them. However, most users agreed that
a context awareness mechanism for delivering these notiﬁcations could reach the original goal without
bothering end-users. The provision of this mechanism will require modeling the users, and keeping and
evolving their preferences according to the users’ behavior.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Concurrency Computat.: Pract. Exper. 2015; 27:2531–2546
DOI: 10.1002/cpe

SUPPORTING PERSONAL SECURITY USING PARTICIPATORY SENSING

2545

The most relevant NFR for users were the information availability and trustworthiness, and also the
quick access to such information. This means that the users realize the role of the time in the use of this
application; i.e. the system must be available when required, and in these applications it must provide
quick, trustworthy, and understandable information to the end-user. In case of the feeding process, the
application must allow the user to do a quick and anonymous report of a situation, without
compromising his personal security.

The functional and non-functional requirements of the system were evaluated involving formal tests.
Particularly the evaluation of NFRs indicates that the system availability, performance, proactivity,
trustworthiness (in terms of the advices that it delivers), and understandability overcome the quality
minimum acceptance level to address the problem by the end-users.

The usability of the system was identiﬁed as a highly important feature; therefore it was evaluated
using two complementary techniques and a new set of users. The obtained results allowed us to
determine the need to adjust some components of the user interface, even though they were minor
issues. The system performance and the pertinence of the warnings given by the application were
not formally evaluated at this stage. However, they were indirectly assessed through the activity test
performed by the evaluators. Our preliminary feelings indicate that these aspects of the solution are
at least between the regular values that a user can expect for these systems.

Concerning the information feeding and delivering processes, they were performed in a suitable way
according to users. The former process kept the high relevance identiﬁed in the requirement elicitation.
These results indicate that the proposed system is usable and useful for addressing the stated problem.
The article also presents a correspondence matrix where we indicate the design decisions made to
address the FRs and NFRs. That matrix represents reusable knowledge that can help other software
designers to address the development of mobile collaborative systems when they are based on a
HWSN or similar structures.

The next step in this initiative is to evaluate the quality aspects of the solution that were not
considered in this ﬁrst stage. Moreover, we want to evaluate the information ﬂow in the ﬁeld using
different quantities and distribution of WUs. This is a research issue that this initiative wants to
explore, because it could indicate that, by increasing the number of witness units and HBS, society
could become more resilient to physical delinquency and crime. Such a strategy will be particularly
focused on crime prevention.

This work has been partially supported by the Fondecyt Project (Chile), grant: 1120207. The work of
Francisco J. Gutierrez has been supported by the Ph.D. Scholarship Program of Conicyt Chile
(CONICYT-PCHA/Doctorado Nacional/2013-21130075).

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

1. Aebi MF, Linde MF. Conviction Statistics as an Indicator of Crime Trends in Europe from 1990 to 2006. European

Journal on Criminal Policy and Research 2012; 18:103–144.

2. Federal Bureau of Investigation. Crime in The United States 2010 - FBI Statistics. (Available at: http://www.fbi.gov/

REFERENCES

about-us/cjis/ucr/crime-in-the-u.s/2010/crime-in-the-u.s.-2010/tables/10tbl01.xls) [May 17, 2014].

3. Dubbeld L. Observing Bodies: Camera Surveillance and the Signiﬁcance of the Body. Ethics and Information

Technology 2003; 5(3):151–162.

4. Posner RA. Privacy, Surveillance and Law. The University of Chicago Law Review 2008; 75(1):245–260.
5. Travis A. CCTV Schemes in City and Town Centres Have Little Effect on Crime. (Available at: http://www.guardian.

co.uk/uk/2009/may/18/cctv-crime-police) [May 17, 2014].

6. Cattelino JR. The Difference that Citizenship Makes: Civilian Crime Prevention on the Lower East Side. Political

and Legal Anthropology Review 2008; 27(1):114–137.

7. Howe J. Crowdsourcing: Why the power of the crowd is driving the future of business. Crown Business: New York,

USA, 2008.

8. Lim SL, Quercia D, Finkelstein A. StakeSource: Harnessing the power of crowdsourcing and social networks in
stakeholder analysis. Proceedings of the 32nd ACM/IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE’10). Cape Town, South Africa, 2010.

9. Burke J, Estrin D, Hansen M, Parker A, Ramanathan N, Reddy S, Srivastava MB. Participatory Sensing. Proceedings

of the World Sensor Web Workshop, in Conjunction with ACM SenSys’06, 2006.

10. Campbell A, Eisenman S, Lane N, Miluzzo E, Peterson R. People-centric Urban Sensing. Proceedings of 2nd Annual

Int. Wireless Internet Conference (WICON’06), 2006.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Concurrency Computat.: Pract. Exper. 2015; 27:2531–2546
DOI: 10.1002/cpe

2546

P. CARREÑO ET AL.

11. Ochoa SF, Santos R. Human-centric Wireless Sensor Networks to Improve Information Availability During Urban

Search and Rescue Activities. Information Fusion 2015; 22.

12. United Nations Development Programme. New Dimensions of Human Security. Human Development Report, 1994.

(Available at: http://hdr.undp.org/en/reports/global/hdr1994/) [May 17, 2014].

13. Safety - OECD Better Life Index. (Available at: http://www.oecdbetterlifeindex.org/topics/safety/) [May 17, 2014].
14. Von Hirsch A, Garland D, Wakeﬁeld A. Ethical and Social Perspectives on Situational Crime Prevention. Hart

Publishing: Oxford, UK, 2004.

15. Clarke R. Situational Crime Prevention. In Building a Safer Society: Strategic Approaches to Crime Prevention,

Tonry M, Farrington D (eds). University of Chicago Press: Chicago, USA, 1995.

16. Partridge H. Developing a Human Perspective to the Digital Divide in the Smart City. Proceedings of the ALIA 2004

Biennial Conference – Challenging Ideas. Kingstone, Australia, 2004.

17. Nam T, Pardo TA. Conceptualizing Smart City with Dimensions of Technology, People, and Institutions. Proceedings 
of the 12th Annual International Conference of Digital Government Research. College Park MD, United States,
2011.

18. Schuurman D, Baccarne B, De Marez L, Mechant P. Smart Ideas for Smart Cities: Investigating Crowdsourcing for
Generating and Selecting Ideas for ICT Innovation in a City Context. Journal of Theoretical and Applied Electronic
Commerce Research 2012; 7(3):49–62.

19. Hall D, Chong C-Y, Llinas J, Liggins M. Distributed Data Fusion for Network-Centric Operations. CRC Press: Boca

Raton, USA, 2012.

20. Lan K-C, Chou C-M, Wang H-Y. An Incentive-Based Framework for Vehicle-Based Mobile Sensing. Procedia

Computer Science, 2012; 1–6.

21. Ballesteros J, Rahman M, Carbunar B, Rishe N. Safe Cities. A Participatory Sensing Approach. Proceedings of the

37th IEEE Local Computer Networks Conference (LCN’12). Clearwater Beach, USA, 2012.

22. Wang X, Cheng W, Mohapatra P, Abdelzaher T. ARTSense: Anonymous Reputation and Trust in Participatory
Sensing. Proceedings of the 32nd IEEE International Conference on Computer Communications. Turin, Italy, 2013.
23. Ouyang RW, Srivastava A, Prabahar P, Choudhury RR, Addicott M, McClernon FJ. If You See Something, Swipe
Towards It: Crowdsourced Event Localization Using Smartphones. Proceedings of UbiComp ’13. Zurich,
Switzerland, 2013.

24. Estrin D. Participatory sensing: applications and architecture. IEEE Internet Computing 2010; 14(1):12–42.
25. Duarte S, Navalho D, Ferreira H, Preguica N. Scalable Data Processing for Community Sensing Applications.

Mobile Networks and Applications 2013; 18(3):357–372.

26. Carreño P, Gutierrez F, Ochoa SF, Fortino G. Using Human-centric Wireless Sensor Networks to Support Personal
Security. Proc. of the 6th Int. Conf. on Internet and Distributed Computing Systems (IDCS13), LNCS 8223, pp. 51-64.
Hangzhou, China. Oct. 28-30th, 2013.

27. Bellifemine F, Fortino G, Giannantonio R, Gravina R, Guerrieri A, Sgroi M. SPINE: A domain-speciﬁc framework

for rapid prototyping of WBSN applications. Software Practice and Experience 2011; 41(3):237–265.

28. Fortino G, Giannantonio R, Gravina R, Kuryloski P, Jafari R. Enabling Effective Programming and Flexible
Management of Efﬁcient Body Sensor Network Applications. IEEE Transactions on Human-Machine Systems
2013; 43(1):115–133.

29. Raveendranathan N, Galzarano S, Loseu V, Gravina R, Giannantonio R, Sgroi M, Jafari R, Fortino G. From Modeling

to Implementation of Virtual Sensors in Body Sensor Networks. IEEE Sensors Journal 2012; 12(3):583–593.

30. Rodríguez-Covili JF, Ochoa SF, Pino JA, Messeguer R, Medina E, Royo D. A Communication Infrastructure to Ease
the Development of Mobile Collaborative Applications. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 2011; 34
(6):1883–1893.

31. Fortino G, Parisi D, Pirrone V, Di Fatta G. BodyCloud: A SaaS Approach for Community Body Sensor Networks.

Future Generation Computer Systems In Press, DOI: doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2013.12.015.

32. Monares A, Ochoa SF, Pino JA, Herskovic V, Rodriguez-Covili J, Neyem A. Mobile Computing in Urban
Emergency Situations: Improving the Support to Fireﬁghters in the Field. Expert Systems with Applications 2011;
38(2):1255–1267.

33. Huang K, Kanhere SS, Hu W. Are You Contributing Trustworthy Data? The Case for A Reputation Framework in

Participatory Sensing. Proceedings of ACM MSWiM, Bodrum, Turkey, 2010.

34. Mashhadi AJ, Capra L. Quality control for real-time ubiquitous crowdsourcing. Proceedings of UbiCrowd’11.

Beijing, China, 2011.

35. Gilb T, Finzi S. Principles of Software Engineering Management. Addison Wesley, 1988.
36. Network Simulator (NS-3). (Available at: http://www.nsnam.org/) [May 17, 2014].
37. Aitken LM, Marshall A, Elliott R, McKinley S. Comparison of ’think aloud’ and observation as data collection
methods in the study of decision making regarding sedation in intensive care patients. International Journal of
Nursing Studies 2011; 48(3):318–325.

38. Holzinger A. Usability engineering methods for software developers. Communications of the ACM 2005; 48(1):71–74.
39. Nielsen J. Usability Engineering. AP Professional: Cambridge, UK, 1993.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Concurrency Computat.: Pract. Exper. 2015; 27:2531–2546
DOI: 10.1002/cpe

