Journal of Universal Computer Science, vol. 16, no. 12 (2010), 1612-1632
submitted: 29/12/09, accepted: 5/5/10, appeared: 28/6/10 © J.UCS

Developing Augmented Objects: A Process Perspective 

(Department of Computer Science, Universidad de Chile, Santiago de Chile, Chile 

(Department of Computer Science, Universidad de Chile, Santiago de Chile, Chile 

Luis A. Guerrero 

luguerre@dcc.uchile.cl) 

Sergio F. Ochoa 

sochoa@dcc.uchile.cl) 

Hector Horta 

hhorta@dcc.uchile.cl)  

 
 

 

 

 
 
 

(Department of Computer Science, Universidad de Chile, Santiago de Chile, Chile 

Abstract: There are many examples of augmented objects in the literature. Augmented objects 
should provide intelligence to the ambient where they are located and also they must require a 
low cognitive effort to be used. Few works have been reported providing guidelines to conceive 
and design these components. Therefore, developers have to use improvised ad hoc software 
processes to support the development of augmented objects. In order to help dealing with this 
situation, this article presents a software process to develop these components. The proposed 
process was named Augmented Objects Development Process (AODeP) and it is based on the 
authors’ previous experiences and software engineering best practices. The article also reports 
two case studies in which AODeP was used to guide the development of augmented objects in 
specific problems. The obtained results are encouraging.  

Keywords: Augmented Objects Development, Ambient Intelligence, Software Process 
Categories: D.2.2, D.2.10, H.5.2 

1 

Introduction  

Recent  advances  in  computer  science  and  ICT  technologies  have  introduced  new 
technological solutions to make life easier for people. During the last years, the users 
of  computers  have  been  limited  to  utilize  classic  interfaces  (i.e.  using  a  keyword, 
mouse  and  a  screen)  to  interact  with  computational  systems.  However,  new 
computing concepts, such as  Ubiquitous  Computing [Weiser 1993] and Augmented 
Objects [Ishii et al. 1997], have provided novel ways to interact with computers and 
also  new  scenarios  to  use  these  systems.  These  computing  concepts  provide 
intelligence to a physical ambient that adapt itself to the needs, tastes, and interests of 
the people who live within those environments, and help them to carry out all kinds of 
tasks  related  to  their  daily  life,  work,  leisure,  etc.  [Abascal  et  al.  2007].  Typically 
these solutions involve socio-technical components. 

This  article  addresses  the  challenge  to  conceive  and  design  augmented  objects, 
which is a particular way to provide ambient intelligence (AmI). Ishii et al. defines an 
augmented  object  as  a  common  object,  which  has  been  provided  with  additional 
functionalities through integrated computing or software systems [Ishii et al. 1997]. 

Guerrero L.A., Ochoa S.F., Horta H.: Developing Augmented Objects ...

1613

Several  augmented  objects  have  been  developed  during  the  last  years  in  order  to 
support  activities  in  various  areas,  such  as  health  [Bravo  et  al.  2008,  Gasca  et  al. 
2009, Villarreal et al. 2009], education [Patten et al. 2006, Ryokai et al. 2004, Ananny 
and  Cassel  2001]  and  daily  life  activities  [Aguilera  et  al.  2006a,b,    Alaman  et  al. 
2007, Sanchez et al. 2008]. Every day these object become more and more common 
and available for the people. However, the development of these components is a real 
challenge  because  it  involves  several  socio-technical  issues.  For  that  reason,  users’ 
participation during the development process is vital. 

After  an  extensive  literature  review,  the  authors  have  not  found  reports  of 
proposals  to  support  the  development  of  augmented  objects  from  a  software 
engineering  approach.  However  there  are  various  interesting  proposals  that  support 
the development of ubiquitous and pervasive systems, which could be adapted to be 
used for augmenting objects. Although these proposals involve requirements similar 
to  those  involved  in  the  object  augmenting  process,  a  more  depth  inside  about  the 
adaption process is required in order to know how to use them properly. This need for 
easy  to  use  guidelines  pushes  developers  to  use  improvised  ad  hoc  development 
processes,  which  consequently  are  typically  expensive  and  non-reusable.  These 
processes could also impact the suitability and effectiveness of the obtained objects.  

In  order  to  help  dealing  with  such  situation,  this  article  proposes  a  systematic 
process to develop augmented objects based on the authors’ previous experiences and 
software  engineering  best  practices.  This  process,  which  was  named  Augmented 
Objects  Development  Process  (AODeP),  uses  knowledge  from  several  disciplines 
(e.g.  human-computer  interaction,  software  engineering,  and  industrial  design)  to 
support the development of this type of components. AODeP has been tested through 
several case studies; two of them are presented in this article.  

In the first case study, a set of phidgets was used to augment a pencil holder that 
embeds  a  clock.  Such  object  is  used  by  the  manager  of  a  Chilean  accountability 
company  to  know  the  progress  of  the  accounting  processes  they  perform  for  the 
clients.  The  second  case  study  augmented  a  portrait  to  make  it  able  to  transmit 
feelings.  Such  object  was  developed  and  used  by  foreign  students  at  the  Computer 
Science  Department  of  the  University  of  Chile,  in  order  to  help  keep  the  link  with 
their relatives and girlfriends, whom live far away. 

Next  section  presents  and  discusses  the  related  work.  Section  3  describes  the 
proposed process. Sections 4 and 5 present the cases studies in which the AODeP was 
used.  Such  sections  also  report  and  discuss  the  obtained  results.  Finally,  Section  6 
presents our conclusions and future work.  

2  Related Work 

An important number of Augmented Reality (AR) experiences have been reported in 
the  literature.  The  experiences  show  how  AR  can  be  used  to  support  interesting 
activities  in  several  application  areas.    In  this  section  we  report  some  of  these 
experiences  and  present  and  discuss  the  research  work  related  to  the  development 
process of ubiquitous, pervasive and AmI systems. 

1614

Guerrero L.A., Ochoa S.F., Horta H.: Developing Augmented Objects ...

2.1  AR on Education 
An example of a system that supports education using augmented objects is Audiopad 
[Patten  et  al.  2006].  It  uses  an  augmented table  to  support  teaching  of  music.  This 
system monitors the movements of various objects presented on the table surface and 
transforms  those  movements  into  commands.  The  commands  are  received  and 
interpreted by a synthesizer, which finally transforms the commands into sounds.  

Other interesting project is I/O Brush, which augments a brush to help children 
from  four  years  to  explore  and  discover  colors  and  textures  from  the  surrounding 
objects  and  movements  for  painting  [Ryokai  et  al.  2004].  This  brush  has  a  small 
camera with lights and a motion sensor. Outside the drawing room, the brush is able 
to capture colors, textures and movements of the surface on  which it travels. Then, 
using these elements the children create their own draws. 

In the TellTale project [Ananny and Cassel 2001] authors have augmented a toy 
like a centipede to help children to develop narrative skills of school children. The 
centipede has five sections; one of them is the head and the others correspond to the 
body. Each child tells a part of a story to one part of the body, which eventually joins. 
By putting the head in place, "TellTale" tells the whole story. The story can change 
simply by interchanging body parts of the object. 

The PlayPals project reports a system designed to be used by children between 5 
and  8  years  old,  which  have  to  learn  to  collaborate  using  a  virtual  environment 
[Bonanni  et  al.  2006].  The  remote  interaction  among  the  children  is  performed 
through avatars (one avatar per child) that react with the children movements.  

2.2  AR on Healthcare 
Several  research  works  have  been  done  in  order  to  provide  ambient  intelligence  to 
hospitals and others facilities related to healthcare activities. For example, in [Sanchez 
et al. 2008] authors proposed a system that represents a smart physical environment to 
automatically estimate hospital-staff activities. Its goals are: (1) to provide a tool that 
allow  hospital  managers to understand the  work dynamics and identify issues to be 
improved, and (2) to provide a set of context-aware applications to medical staff.  

Bravo  et  al.  propose  a  solution  to  improve  and  complement  Alzheimer’s  care 
based on the use of NFC (Near Field Communications) and DTT (Digital Terrestrial 
Television) [Bravo et al. 2008]. Using this solution caregivers can remotely monitor 
patients  and  interact  with  other  healthcare  personnel  through  NFC  enabled  mobile 
phones. These researchers also present a complementary system for Alzheimer care, 
which includes visualization of activities at home. 

Villarreal et al. [2009] propose a mobile monitoring system that allows patients 
with diabetes to  have a constant control of their  glucose tendency as  well as direct 
communication with their physicians. This system eases patients’ lives and increases 
the monitoring and control activities performed by patients and physicians. 

Gasca et al. [2009] describes a persuasive system aimed at promoting a healthy 
lifestyle  in  patients  with  a  chronic  disease  whom  participate  in  a  supporting  group. 
Such  system  binds  the  ideas  of  persuasive  computing  [Fogg  2002]  and  virtual 
communities in order to obtain a solution able to support interactions between health 
specialists and the community members (i.e. patients).  

Guerrero L.A., Ochoa S.F., Horta H.: Developing Augmented Objects ...

1615

Misook  and  Jeunwoo  [2007]  propose  an  Instant  Messaging  system  that  shares 
context  information  relating  to  health  and  covering  things  such  as  physical  activity 
and  smoking  behavior.  The  system,  named  UP  Health  (Ubiquitously  Persuasive 
Health Promotion), includes special features (e.g. advises, alarms and notification) to 
enhance healthy behaviors of the people.  

2.3  AR at Home 
Concerning  AR  at  home  there  are  also  several  interesting  initiatives.  For  example, 
Alaman et al. [2007] describe various projects for home-oriented AmI environments 
developed  in  Spain.  These  projects  include:  (1)  a  prototype  of  a  smart  living  room 
which include several sensors and actuators in order to manage the ambient behavior 
based on a set of rules, (2) an AmI environment named Plan B, which is based in a 
novel operating system, and (3) identification technologies (e.g. RFID and NFC) to 
provide intelligence to a physical environment.  

Aguilera  et  al.  [2006a]  proposes  a  desktop-lock  system  to  indicate  users’ 
presence in a physical environment. This system augments the traditional door-lock 
system by using an augmented key. It allows users to open and close virtual shared 
workplaces and show/hide their presence to other users connected to the shared space. 
Unlike the real world, virtual desktop-locks are not associated with just one key, but 
with many keys as long as they belong a valid virtual workplace for a user. Aguilera 
et  al.  [2006b]  also  designed  an  augmented  picture  frame,  that  allows  anyone  with 
Internet access to transmit their feelings as a  way of communicating emotions. The 
development of this application is analyzed more in depth in section 5. 

The Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) has a  major initiative  named 
House_n  [MIT  2010].  Such  initiative  hosts  several  projects  that  explore  the  use  of 
technologies to provide intelligence to physical environments and their components. 
Thus,  researchers  try  to  respond  to  the  needs  of  people  that  live  technological 
environments.  Georgia  Tech’s  Aware  House  (www.cc.gatech.edu/fce/ahri)  and 
Ericsson’s 
intelligent  condominiums  (www.e2-home.com)  are  other  relevant 
initiatives similar to House_n.  

2.4  AR on Sport Clothes/Accessories 
There  are  also  examples  of  commercial  augmented  objects.  Nike  and  Apple  have 
developed an extension to the MP3 player  iPod,  which allows users of Nikes  sport 
shoes  (compatible  with  the  system)  to  keep  statistics  of  the  traveled  distances  and 
times involved in exercise activities [Nike 2010]. By synchronizing the iPod with a 
host system (running in a PC), users can get a full history of the performed exercise.  
Adidas in conjunction with Polar (a company specialized in sport watches) have 
been  conducting  a  similar  initiative  named  “Project  Fusion”  [Adidas  2010].  Such 
project  designs  a  sport  watch  able  to  measure  several  variables  from  a  person  (e.g. 
time training and heart rate) when s/he is using particular models of Adidas t-shirts.  
Motorola and Burton companies developed the Audex Jacket [Motorola and Burton 
2010].  This  jacket  allows  users  to  answer  phone  calls  through  these  garments. 
Another company, Oakley, a maker of sunglasses and clothing for extreme sports, has 
developed  sunglasses  models  that  incorporate  a  hands-free  Bluetooth  headset  to  be 
used with Motorola cellular phones [Oakley 2010]. 

1616

Guerrero L.A., Ochoa S.F., Horta H.: Developing Augmented Objects ...

2.5  AR in the Military Context 
There  are  many  examples  related  to  the  use  of  Augmented  Reality  in  the  military 
context, especially in the field of simulations and military training [Livingston et al. 
2002]. For instance, Yen-Hung et al. [2008] describe several AR techniques for the 
visualization  of  robotic  helicopters  performing  field  tasks.  Henderson  and  Feiner 
[2009]  shows  the  design,  implementation  and  testing  of  an  augmented  reality 
prototype application that supports military vehicle’ mechanics.  

There  are  also  research  works  reporting  the  use  of  AR  to  visualize  military 
operations  in  field.  These  applications  require  video  cameras  and  eye  tracking 
systems  to  provide  additional  information  to  the  users  [Park  et  al.  2008]. Typically 
such information is related to particular objects (including other participants) that are 
in the physical context of the user. 

2.6  Development of Ubiquitous/Pervasive Systems 
There  are  several  interesting  proposals  for  developing  ubiquitous  and  pervasive 
systems,  which  could  be  used  by  AO  designers  to  conceive  new  solutions.  For 
instance, Chen et al. [2004] proposed an ontology called SOUPA for designing and 
model pervasive computing applications. Henricksen et al. [2002] propose a model of 
the context concepts for pervasive computing. Arroyo et al. [2008] present a design 
model to develop ubiquitous e-learning Systems.  

There are also several middleware platforms that allow the development of these 
systems following a component-based [Becker 2004], aspect-oriented [Fuentes et al. 
2006] or service-oriented approaches [Lopez de Ipiña et al. 2006, Ibrahim et al. 2007]. 
Although  these  proposals  have  shown  to  be  useful  to  support  the  design  and 
development of ubiquitous and pervasive systems, it is not clear how to adapt these 
solutions  to  make  them  applicable  for  augmenting  objects.  Typically  AO  designers 
require  simple  and  easy  to  use  guidelines;  therefore  this  promising  approach  still 
requires some extra effort in that address to become it useful for augmenting objects. 

2.7  Development of AmI Systems 
“Ambient intelligence (AmI) is an exciting new information technology paradigm in 
which  people  are  empowered  through  a  digital  environment  that  is  aware  of  their 
presence  and  context  and  is  sensitive,  adaptive,  and  responsive  to  their  needs” 
[Ducatel et al. 2001]. “It proposes a shift in computing from the traditional computer 
to  a  whole  set  of  devices  placed  around  us  providing  users  with  an  intelligent 
background” [Bravo et al. 2006]. 

The  development  of  these  systems  is  closely-related  to  the  design  and 
implementation of augmented objects. An intelligent ambient can use one or various 
augmented objects in order to provide individual or collective services to the users. 
The  goal  of  the  Aml  spaces  and  the  augmented  objects  is  the  same:  applying 
technology to support specific activities of our life, considering the final user as the 
most important concept, and making the technology an invisible presence [Vázquez 
and Lopez de Ipiña 2005]. Clearly several features of the AmI design processes can 
be extrapolated to help design Augmented Objects. 

In the same way, the “Internet of Things” (IoT) approach [Welbourne et al. 2009] 
tries  to  extend  the  Internet  into  our  everyday  lives,  using  capabilities  provided  by 

Guerrero L.A., Ochoa S.F., Horta H.: Developing Augmented Objects ...

1617

wireless  networks  and  RFID-tag  objects.  These  tags  help  identifying  people  and 
objects, and also provide additional information from/to them. These capabilities are 
useful to monitor the environment conditions and users activities (i.e. to identify who, 
when, where and what) [Bravo et al. 2006]. Researchers envision that most physical 
components of an environment (i.e. objects and persons) will contain tags that help 
provide  intelligence  to  our  environments  in  the  near  future  [Lopez  de  Ipiña  et  al. 
2009]. Such components, including augmented objects, will be part of this future. 

3  Augmented Objects Development Process 

The process of augmenting an object is usually part of a larger software project that 
includes  to  augment  one  or  more  objects,  and  also  to  create  several  software 
components  around  of  them,  in  order  to  solve  a  particular  problem.  Therefore,  the 
development of augmented objects must be embedded as part of the regular software 
process that is used by the development team to reach particular objectives. Since the 
augmented object definition requires an important participation of the users, evolving 
software  development  methodologies  or  agile  processes  are  strongly  recommended. 
Figure 1 shows the  Augmented Objects Development Process (AODeP),  which can 
be combined with agile software processes in order to guide the conception, design, 
implementation  and  testing  of  augmented  objects.  This  systematic  and  iterative 
process is driven by the users’ feedback and it involves the six stages shown in Fig 1.  
The  AODeP  process  starts  identifying  and  analyzing  the  problem  to  be  solved 
through the use of an augmented object. It tries to understand the real problem and 
avoids  falling  into  development  processes  guided  by  problem  symptoms.  Based  on 
such information, developers will be able to determine most functional requirements 
to be considered during the augmented object (AO) design and implementation.  
The  analysis  of  the  AO  usage  context  is  the  second  step.  Such  analysis  provides 
contextual information about the physical workplace where the augmented object will 
be  used  and  also  about  the  users’  general  capabilities  and  skills.  This  analysis 
provides  most  non-functional  requirements  to  be  considered  during  the  AO  design. 
Particularly, HCI requirements and restrictions are obtained from this activity. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Guerrero L.A., Ochoa S.F., Horta H.: Developing Augmented Objects ...

1618

 

Figure 1: Development process of an AO 

 

functional 

Similar to any software project, functional requirements (initially gathered from 
step  1)  and  non-functional  requirements  (gathered  from  step  2)  are  interrelated.  It 
means 
(i.e. 
positively/negatively)  the  accomplishment  of  non-functional  ones,  and  vice  versa. 
Therefore during the third step, developers have to define the set of requirements that 
must be considered during the AO design and implementation processes. 

requirements  usually  affects 

that  considering  some 

During  the  fourth  step,  the  object  to  be  augmented  must  be  selected.  This 
selection process considers the set of requirements identified in the previous step and 
also a study of the regular objects available in the workplace, in order to determine 
which element is the most appropriate to be augmented.  

The  fifth  step  involves  designing  and  implementing  the  augmented  object 
according to the rationale generated during the previous stages. Since the augmented 
objects  development  requires  an  important  participation  of  the  users,  it  is 
recommended  to  guide  development  of  this  object  by  using  small  and  simple 
prototypes.  Such  prototypes  must  be  tested  by  the  users  (seventh  step)  and  evolve 
according to the users’ feedback. Thus, after some iterations the obtained object can 
be considered as a valid augmented element 

Guerrero L.A., Ochoa S.F., Horta H.: Developing Augmented Objects ...

1619

The users’ participation during the whole development process is vital to obtain 
useful and non-invasive augmented objects. It also helps reduce the development risks 
and  increase  the  impact  of  the  final  solution.  Next  sections  present  a  detailed 
explanation of the phases involved in the proposed augmented objects development 
process. 

Problem Definition 

3.1 
The problem definition stage identifies limitations to overcome and opportunities to 
take  advantage  using  augmented  objects.  An  in-depth  analysis  of  the  situation  is 
required to be sure the problem or opportunity is the right one and it is worth to be 
addressed.  

The  analysis  of  the  problem  must  allow  obtaining  an  initial  set  of  functional 
requirements  to  be  considered  when  developing  the  augmented  object.  This  set 
represents the users’ requirements, which provide a business view of the problem to 
address.  It  is  recommended  to  work  on  a  small  and  simple  set  of  functional 
requirements to keep the project risk under control. For such reason, if the object to be 
augmented is complex and involves much functionality (e.g. a whole living room), it 
is  recommended  to  use  an  incremental  process.  The  main  goal  of  the  augmented 
object must be defined during this stage, and it must be established through a small, 
simple and validated set of users’ requirements.  

3.2  AO Usage Context  
The problem context is highly relevant to determine the type of solution that will be 
more effective for a particular situation. An analysis of the problem context will allow 
developers  to  determine  the  set  of  non-functional  requirements  that  must  be 
considered  in  the  solution.  Examples  of  non-functional  requirements  are:  the  users’ 
skills to interact with technology, the time periods in which the potential AO must be 
available for the users, the dynamic of the environment where the AO will be located 
and the AO users’ routine.  

Alarcon et al. [2006] propose a method to analyze the several contexts involved 
in computer-supported mobile collaborative work. Such analysis allows developers to 
determine  functional  and  non-functional  requirements  involved  into  a  software 
product.  These  researchers  also  propose  a  strategy  to  align  functional  and  nonfunctional 
requirements [Guerrero et al. 2006]. Since these proposals are suitable to 
analyze the AO usage context and also to align the AO functional and non-functional 
requirements, authors recommend using these techniques to conduct this stage. 

3.3  Requirements Definition  
Using  the  information  gathered  in  the  previous  steps,  it  is  possible  to  establish  a 
formal set of requirements that will be involved in the development of the augmented 
object. Users must participate in this definition; therefore, this set of requirements is 
sometimes  the  result  of  a  negotiation  process  between  developers  and  users.  One 
particular  issue  that  must  be  considered  in  this  requirements  list  is  the  physical 
interaction  mechanisms  that  are  feasible  for  users,  in  order  to  use  properly  the 
augmented objects. In most cases these interaction mechanisms are so important that 
deserve special consideration to ensure the usability of the solution.  

1620

Guerrero L.A., Ochoa S.F., Horta H.: Developing Augmented Objects ...

As  was  mentioned  before,  if  the  product  is  complex  or  involves  much 
functionality  it  must  be  developed  by  increments.  Each  increment  must  include  a 
particular  set  of  requirements,  which  determine  the  project’s  scope,  cost,  risk  and 
possible impact. In order to keep the project under control, this set must be kept as 
small and simple as possible; not only in this stage but also into the whole project. 

Once  the  requirements  are  selected,  they  must  be  turned  into  features  to  be 
embedded  into  one  augmented  object.  In  order  to  do  that,  it  is  worth  to  create  a 
metaphor of similar interaction characteristics to simplify the process of identifying 
the best real object to be augmented.  

Selection of the Object to be Augmented 

3.4 
This stage of the process analyzes the set of requirements in order to identify the best 
real object to be augmented. This selection activity, which was defined in a previous 
work (see [Aguilera et al. 2006a]), analyzes the syntactic and semantic models related 
to each object that is candidate to be augmented. The syntactic model determines how 
we manipulate the object, and the semantic model establishes how we interpret their 
use. In both cases it is important to consider the physical nature of the objects that are 
candidate to be augmented.  

Syntactic and semantic models of every object are developed by answering a set 
of  questions  related  to  twelve  dimensions:  usage,  feedback,  history,  intention, 
consequence, action, dependence, opportunity, access, roles, reach and view [Aguilera 
et al. 2006a]. Each dimension  must be analyzed at  two abstraction levels:  syntactic 
and semantic. This AO selection process is presented in-depth in sections 4 and 5.  

Once concluded this analysis process, the developers could have more than one 
candidate object to be augmented. In  such case, the decision about  which object to 
augment becomes a decision that must be made in consensus between the developers 
and the users. Typically, the development time, cost, risks, and the effectiveness of 
each potential solution are variables that must be considered.  

Sometimes the selected object is not fully aligned with the requirements specified 
in  the  previous  stage.  In  such  case,  the  project  requirements  must  be  adjusted 
according  to  the  features  of  the  object  to  be  augmented.  If  the  set  of  requirements 
cannot be adjusted, a new potentially augmentable object should be introduced into 
the environment, and it must be evaluated with the users.  

Since  this  is  one  of  the  most  risky  stages  of  the  development  process,  the 
matching  between  requirements  and  the  potential  augmented  object  should  be 
evaluated. Typically this evaluation process is done by using a system prototype. 

3.5  Development the Augmented Object  
Since  the  augmented  object  design  and  implementation  are  challenging  tasks  that 
involve  a  high  uncertainty,  it  is  recommended  to  address  them  by  defining  and 
refining prototypes. It requires creating a quick prototype of the object, and testing it 
with real users. Usability tests are mandatory. The obtained feedback can be used to 
improve the object design and/or implementation. This process must be repeated more 
than once in order to be sure the project goes on the right way. 

Several  guidelines  to  conduct  this  stage  are  available  in  the  HCI  literature; 
however the most appropriate ones will depend on each particular project. AR toolkits 

Guerrero L.A., Ochoa S.F., Horta H.: Developing Augmented Objects ...

1621

and  frameworks  can  be  used  to  support  this  stage.  Typically  it  helps  to  reduce  the 
project cost, duration and risks.  

Testing with Users 

3.6 
Testing with users must be done incrementally. During the project inception period, 
testing  activities  are  oriented  to  explore  and  validate  alternatives  of  solution.  Fast 
prototypes (some of them in paper) are used to reach such objective. While the project 
evolves, the prototypes should become more complex and tangible (from a software 
system  to  a  functional  scale  model  representing  the  augmented  object).  All  these 
interim representations of augmented objects must be tested with final users to be sure 
the  objects  will  be  appropriate  to  solve  the  problem.  If  the  testing  process  is 
conducted  properly,  the  impact  of  the  final  product  should  be  previewed  before  to 
conclude the object implementation. Eventually, the testing process evidences some 
problems regarding the requirements or the object selected to be augmented. In such 
case,  the  problematic  element  should  be  reviewed.  It  is  important  to  detect  these 
situations early, because the cost of fixing it increases with the project progress. Next 
sections present two case studies that used AODeP to augment specific objects. 

4  Case Study 1: Progress Indicator of an Accountability Process 

This case study involved a Chilean accountability company, which provides services 
on bookkeeping (i.e. accounting), wages and tax advices, to health small and mediumsize 
enterprises. The client company has a portfolio of customers that is managed by 
various accountants. Typically this is a 1-to-N relationship, where an accountant has 
to manage several clients. 

In order to maintain a good quality of service and meet the schedule established 
by  the  Chilean  Government’s  Tax  and  Revenue  Service  (TRS),  it  is  vital  for  the 
company to keep the control over the progress of the accountability process related to 
each client. The TRS establishes the due dates (monthly) to submit the incomes and 
expenses  declarations  for  several  tracks  of  tax-payers.  Based  on  such  dates,  each 
accountant  must  interact  with  his/her  clients  in  order  to  obtain  the  information 
required  to  elaborate  the  reports.  Accomplishing  such  deadlines  is  vital  for  the 
accountability company in order to avoid problems to its client. 

The  company  organizational  structure  is  composed  of  a  manager  (who  is  the 
owner of the company) and seven accountants. The manager, who has an extensive 
knowledge of all the processes, acted as the main user during this project. 

Problem to Address 

4.1 
Typically  each  client  has  assigned  a  particular  accountant,  who  is  in  charge  of 
managing the relationship with the TRS. This feature of the accountability service is 
highly appreciated by the clients, and it represents an important competitiveness and 
marketing tool for the company. However it also represents a focus of problems for 
the company. 

This lack of rotation between clients and accountants makes strong links between 
clients  and  the  service  provider.  Every  month  the  clients  have  to  deliver  the 

1622

Guerrero L.A., Ochoa S.F., Horta H.: Developing Augmented Objects ...

accounting information to the company by a due date. However, this information is 
usually incomplete or delayed. Most clients feel the strong relationship with his/her 
accountant allows them to submit the information after the due date. Unfortunately, it 
becomes the incomes declaration process into a rally. Every month, one week before 
the deadline, accountants have to extend their labor journey in order to complete this 
process. Accomplish the deadlines is mandatory. 

In order to keep the process under control, the manager asks for information to 
accountants  during  critical  periods.  Although  it  is  needed,  such  request  overloads 
accountants and it does not provide the visibility required  by the  manager. For that 
reason the manager wants to count on a visual and easy to use tool that allows him to 
monitor the whole declaration process without interrupt the accountants work. 

4.2  Usage Context 
The company already had a software tool to support the accounting process. However 
this  system  does  not  indicate  the  degree  of  progress  for  each  accountant.  For  that 
reason,  this  project  should  extend  the  legacy  system  to  deal  with  this  requirement. 
Additionally,  the  project  has  to  develop  a  special  tool  (an  augmented  object)  that 
allows the manager to monitor the process. The manager (and  owner) of the company 
is  an  older  person  with  important  limitations  for  using  new  technology.  Therefore, 
accountants deliver printed reports to the manager, who review them sited at his desk. 
Since  the  manager  is  limited  to  use  technological  solutions,  the  most  appropriate 
approach  was  to  augment  an  every-day  object  of  his  office.  Using  such  object  he 
should be able to monitor the progress of the whole process. 

Several  meetings  were  done  to  exploring  this  idea  with  the  client  and  define  a 
useful metaphor for him. The selected metaphor was: “to match the progress of the 
whole  accounting  process  with  the  filling  process  of  a  fuel  tank  into  a  car”.  If 
“empty”,  it  means  no  customers  were  served,  and  every  client  that  is  served 
“augments the fuel amount into the car tank”.  

Involved Requirements 

4.3 
Extreme programming and AODeP were used as methodological frameworks to guide 
the  development  process.  Next,  we  present  the  most  important  users  requirements 
involved into the development of the augmented object.  
•  Monitoring  of  tax  payments  -  The  system  must  be  able  to  show  the  current 
progress of the client’s tax payment process. It should be shown in two formats: 
(1) the summary of the whole process; and (2) a summary by accountant. 

• 

•  Monitoring progress of monthly provisional payments - The system must inform 
the progress of the monthly interim payments from clients. It involves the same 
information deployment formats than the previous requirement. 
Information  access  -  The  information  should  be  accessed  through  simple  and 
intuitive actions, e.g. by clicking.  
Information visualization - The information  should be deployed in a  graphical 
and simple format, which must be easy to be understandable by the user. 

• 

Guerrero L.A., Ochoa S.F., Horta H.: Developing Augmented Objects ...

1623

Selecting the Object to be Augmented 

4.4 
At  this  stage,  several  elements  available  in  the  managers’  office  were  analyzed  in 
order  to  determine  the  most  appropriate  component  to  be  augmented.  This  analysis 
was done using the technique proposed by Aguilera et al. [2006a], which analyzes the 
syntactic and semantic models related to each candidate object.  

After  analyzing  the  syntactic  and  semantic  models  of  various  objects,  a  pencil 
holder with an embedded clock (similar to the one showed in Figure 2) was selected. 
Table 1 shows part of the analysis conducted with this purpose. 
The selected element was aligned with the interaction metaphor adopted in the usage 
context  analysis  stage.  In  addition,  such  object  played  an  important  role  in  the 
manager routine and its use involved a small cognitive effort for him.  
 

Figure 2: Object to be augmented 

 

Question  

Answer 

 

Syntactic 
Model 
Use 

How do we use a pencil holder with an 
embedded clock? 

Attention  When do we pay attention to a pencil 

holder with an embedded clock?  
Control  Who have access to this object? 

History  Who knows how to use this object?  
Semantic 
Model 

Question  

Opportunity  What  are  the  consequences  of  using 

this object?  

Access 
Previous  
knowledge 

 Cost  

How can we access this object? 
What do we must know in order to use 
this object?  
How much cognitive effort represents 
the use of this object? 

We  put  it  on  our  desktop;  in  a  place  we  can 
observe the clock and store pencils.  
We paid attention to it when we need a pencil, 
or when we want to know what time is it.  
To the clock: Every people in the room. To the 
pencils: the owner of the desktop. 
People in the office know how to use this object.   
 

Answer 

Clock:  When  we  use  this  object  we  know  the 
current  time.  Pencil  holder:  we  put  all  the 
pencils in a common place. 
We  must  put  this  object  in  a  visible  and 
accessible place (usually, in our desktop). 
We must know how to read the clock. 

We need to focus our attention on the object. 
The effort for reading the clock is “small”.  

Table 1: Analysis of the pencil holder 

1624

Guerrero L.A., Ochoa S.F., Horta H.: Developing Augmented Objects ...

4.5  Development of the Object to be Augmented (first prototype) 
In order to evaluate the idea to augment the pencil holder, a prototype was developed 
using a box and a set of phidgets (see  Fig. 3). Using a  services interface a phidget 
periodically asks for information to the company server. The server informs the status 
of the whole incomes declaration process. Then, the phidget uses a servo to move the 
clock hand, which indicates the process progress over one scale. It works as a petrol 
gauge and keeps the metaphor defined with the user. 

 

 

 

 

Figure 3: Prototype of the Augmented Object, which use an USB port 

 

 

Figure 4: Augmented pencil holder designed for the client 

 

 

The prototype way tested for one month, and the preliminary results were highly 
positive. For that reason the development team started to design the final version of 
the augmented object (see Fig. 4). This augmented object is able to monitor the two 
processes  defined  in  the  requirements  stage,  i.e.  tax  payments  and  provisional 
payments  processes.  For  each  process,  the  object  indicates  the  progress  of  such 
process (i.e. a summary of the accountants work) and also the progress of the work 
performed by a particular accountant. All functions are available just by clicking two 
buttons.  

Guerrero L.A., Ochoa S.F., Horta H.: Developing Augmented Objects ...

1625

Testing with Users 

4.6 
The  use  of  the  prototype  shown  in  Fig.  3  indicated  the  metaphor  representing  the 
process  progress  was  right.  It  reduced  the  pressing  the  manager  applied  on  the 
accountants. However this experience also put in evidence the need to count on more 
detailed information concerning the process. Particularly, the  manager indicated the 
need  of  putting  available  all  the  requested  information  (specified  in  the  user 
requirements) through the same user interface. The evolution of this prototype, i.e. the 
augmented object, was in charge of dealing with such requirement.  

The  augmented  object  was  put  into  production,  and  the  obtained  results  were 
according  to  the  previous  experiences  and  the  users’  and  developers’  expectations. 
Currently, this object plays an important role into the company.  

The  manager  and  accountants  agree  the  processes  continue  being  stressful,  but 
now  they  are  under  control.  The  manager  increased  the  visibility  of  the  processes; 
therefore  he  can  take  early  corrective  actions  in  case  he  needs  it.  In  addition,  the 
manager  does  not  need  to  ask  for  information  to  the  accountants,  because  all 
information is online. 

Accountants  feel  more  comfortable  with  the  available  time  to  complete  the 
process  because  they  know  that  such  time  is  now  effective.  In  the  previous  work 
scenario, the accountants had to inform the process progress every day, depending on 
the uncertainty and stress of the manager. Therefore, the available time to complete 
the assignment decreased every day. 

Involved Technologies 

4.7 
The implementation of the augmented pencil holder involved components of several 
phidgets kits [Phidget 2010]. These components included I/O boards, several sensors, 
switches,  LEDs,  sensor  cables,  RFID  tags,  motors  and  relays,  among  others.  These 
phidgets kits include also a software library (written in C) that allows monitoring and 
controlling these components. Services provided by the library are accessible through 
an application programming interface (API). Applications that help augment objects 
can be written in several programming languages; in the examples presented in this 
paper such language was C#.   

All phidgets can be connected to the computer using USB. Phidgets run as USB 
1.1  low  speed  or  full  speed  devices,  and  they  are  supported  by  USB  1.1/2.0  hosts. 
Every  phidget  has  a  serial  number,  which  is  unique.  This  feature  allows  software 
systems to address a specific device independently of the number of phidgets that are 
being used at the same time. A particular service named phidget manager is able to 
get a list of devices (and their serial numbers) that are active in a certain time period. 
These two particular services are highly valuable to augment physical objects. 

5  Case study 2: Peer-to-peer Portrait 

The second project in which AODeP was used involved a group of graduate students 
of a HCI course delivered in our Computer Science Department at the University of 
Chile. In this course, every group (composed by three students) had to define a final 
project. The group involved in this case study was composed by three students: two 

1626

Guerrero L.A., Ochoa S.F., Horta H.: Developing Augmented Objects ...

foreign students and one Chilean student from a distant city. When discussing about 
the project, they realize that all of them miss their relatives and girlfriends, whom live 
far away. Therefore, they decided to address this topic into their course project. 

Problem to Address 

5.1 
These  students  decided  to  try  to  increase  the  personal  feelings  awareness  between 
them and their relatives and girlfriends by using Internet as communication platform. 
This awareness involved the transmission of feelings and sensations to their relatives 
using a simple and natural  mechanism. The involved people had particular routines 
and  schedules  to  interact.  In  this  way,  the  solution  should  allow  asynchronous 
communication  and  it  does  not  have  to  interfere  with  the  current  activities  of  the 
users.  The  students  found  that  most  well-known  Internet-based  tools,  as  email  or 
social networks, were not usable for older persons (e.g. the parents and grandparents 
of the students). The solution to be developed must be accessible to people with an 
ample range of knowledge about the technology. Experienced users would be able to 
access  the  advanced  services  provided  by  the  solution;  while  inexperienced  ones 
would access just basic functions. Considering this restriction, the students decided to 
augment a common object in order to transmit emotional messages, expressing what 
they were feeling at that moment. 

5.2  Usage Context 
The  final  users  of  the  augmented  object  would  be  these  graduate  students,  their 
relatives  and/or  loved  ones.  The  students’  girlfriends,  sons  and  sisters  were  young 
people  and  they  were  familiar  with  technology.  The  houses  where  the  students’ 
relatives and girlfriends were living counted with Internet connection. However, the 
students’ parents were old people and –similar to the client of the previous projectthey 
were very unfamiliar with the use of Internet and new technologies. The solution 
should be very easy to use in order to allow all the involved people to understand the 
message sent through the augmented object. 

Involved Requirements 

5.3 
In this project the main functional requirement was clear enough: to send moods (how 
do I feel?) through an augmented object from students to their relatives, and hopefully 
in vice versa. The solution should be easy to access, understand and use. The solution 
must  use  Internet  as  communication  platform  and  it  must  allow  asynchronous 
communication among users. 

Selection of the Object to be Augmented 

5.4 
After  studying  some  common  objects  available  in  the  users’  physical  contexts, 
students decided that a portrait was the best object to be augmented. Table 2 shows 
part of the analysis done when applying the methodology proposed by Aguilera et al. 
[2006a] to that object. 

 

 
 

Guerrero L.A., Ochoa S.F., Horta H.: Developing Augmented Objects ...

1627

Question  

Answer 

How  do  we  manipulate  a 
portrait?  

We  put  a  photo  in  the  portrait.  Then  we  put  the 
portrait in a visible place, showing the photo. 

How  do  we  know  if  the 
portrait works?  

Because the photo fits in the portrait and we can see 
it.  

What  do  we  want  when 
using a portrait?  

We want the portrait shows us a photo. We want the 
portrait still in the same place, in front to the people.  

… 

Question  

… 

Answer 

 

Syntactic 
Model 

Use 

Feedback 

Intention 

… 

Semantic 
Model 

Opportunity  When  do  we  use  a 

portrait?  

When  we  want  to  recall  loved  people  or  special 
moments.  

Intention 

History 

… 

What  is  the  intention  of 
the  user  when  using  a 
portrait?  

Keeping  in  mind  particular  persons  or  special 
moments. Feeling again some particular emotions. 

How  do  we  know  if  a 
portrait has been used?  

When  the  photo  change.  When  it  is  in  a  different 
place. When is clean. 

… 

… 

Table 2: Analysis of the portrait 

Students conclude the portrait was the best object to be augmented because its use 
produces the lower cognitive effort. Moreover, when we look at a portrait and see the 
photo inside, most of the time we can remember emotions related to such persons or 
the situation in which the photo was taken. This sensation increases if in those photos 
are relatives or friends. Thus, this object already achieves the objective in the real life. 
Therefore,  the  augmented  object  had  just  to  control  the  feelings  the  users  want  to 
transmit, and then represent such feeling correctly through the interface. 

5.5  Development of the Augmented Object 
In order to evaluate this idea, students designed a first  software prototype in  which 
two portraits  were connected through the Internet. Two different computers run the 
software that allowed  users to share their portraits between them and transmit  their 
emotions (see Fig. 5).  

This  software  portrait  was  augmented  with  some  features  that  allowed  it  to 
transmit the users’ feelings. For example, a user is able to establish which photo of 
him/her must be shown in the remote frames for a certain time period. Thus, remote 
portraits  deploying  the  picture  of  such  person  will  show  how  does  such  person  is 
feeling. Besides, some other buttons were added in order to show the “intensity” of 
the  feeling  (e.g.  emotional  buttons  and  heart  emotional  indicator,  see  Fig.  5).  Such 
software  prototype  was  tested  with  several  users;  all  of  them  were  young  people. 

1628

Guerrero L.A., Ochoa S.F., Horta H.: Developing Augmented Objects ...

After  an  adjustment  process  was  able  to  transmit  the  feeling  envisioned  by  the 
developers. Therefore, the next step was to build the augmented object prototype in 
order to evaluate it use with older persons (e.g. the parents of the students). 

 

Figure 5. Software prototype for the portrait (augmented) object 

 

Two  portraits  were  built  with  such  purpose.  Every  portrait  was  connected  to  a 
computer through an USB port. These computers were connected to Internet and run 
the portrait software version as well, as shown in Fig. 6. The portraits implementation 
involved the same technologies as the previous case study. 

 

 

Figure 6: Prototype of the portrait connected to Internet by an USB port 

Testing with Users 

5.6 
Initially a graduate  student and his  girlfriend (who lives in another city)  used these 
augmented objects for a period of three weeks. Each person had a portrait connected 
to his/her own computer, which was showing the picture of the loved one. After using 

Guerrero L.A., Ochoa S.F., Horta H.: Developing Augmented Objects ...

1629

this  augmented  object,  these  persons  increased  the  number  of  interactions  among 
them. As an anecdote, our student said his telephone account experiment an important 
increment during this month, because his girlfriend asks him to call her every time she 
knows he was sad or worry. 

After such experience, the portraits were used by a foreign graduate student (who 
was not part of the development team) and his parents. In this case, the parents had 
Internet  in  the  house,  but  they  do  not  know  how  to  use  it.  Therefore,  the  student’s 
brothers become as intermediaries among the graduate students and his parents. After 
using the portraits for a couple of months, it was possible to observe that the only one 
transmitting real feeling was the graduate student. His family transmitted just positive 
emotions because they believed that negative emotions could produce distractions and 
worries to the student work.  

Although  it  does  not  work  as  was  planned,  it  helped  the  whole  family  to  keep 
connected. Every day (and sometimes more than once in a day) the graduate student 
and his parents sent their emotions through the peer-to-peer portrait. In addition, at 
least a daily email was sent among them. After a while, the students’ parents were so 
interested in this type of communication that both of them learnt to use email just to 
be closer to their son. 

6  Conclusions and Future Work 

Developing augmented objects is a challenging task because it involve a large amount 
of  uncertainty  that  range  from  technological  issues  to  users  behavior.  Several 
interesting works have been reported by the augmented reality and ambient intelligent 
research communities. However these authors do not found proposals to address these 
developments  as  a  systematic  process,  which  considers  lessons  learnt  and  software 
engineering  best  practices.  Therefore,  we  conclude  that  most  of  the  current 
developments are being guided by ad hoc process. 

There is much evidence in the literature that indicates the risks and disadvantages 
of  developing  with  ad  hoc  processes.  Some  of  the  most  relevant  consequences  that 
apply  to  the  development  of  augmented  objects  using  ad  hoc  processes  are  the 
following ones: (1) an increment of the project cost, risks and development time, (2) 
the uncertainty of the impact that can be obtained with the product, (3) the reduction 
of the projects success rate. 

In order to help dealing with this situation, this article proposes the Augmented 
Objects  Development  Process  (AODeP),  a  systematic  process  that  guides  the 
development  of  augmented  objects  based  on  the  authors’  previous  experiences  and 
software  engineering  best  practices.  AODeP  has  been  used  in  various  case  studies; 
two of them were presented in this article. 

The  obtained  results  show  the  process  is  able  to  successfully  guide  the 
development of augmented objects. At the moment the experiences have been highly 
positive for users and developers. Unfortunately, the authors have been involved (in 
some way) in every project in which AODeP technique was used. Therefore, an issue 
to address in the future work is to observe projects conducted by third persons that use 
AODeP  to  guide  the  process.  The  feedback  obtained  from  them  will  be  useful  to 
validate and improve the proposed technique. 

1630

Guerrero L.A., Ochoa S.F., Horta H.: Developing Augmented Objects ...

In the next future we are planning to augment new objects in order to validate and 
customize  the  proposed  technique.  In  such  experiences,  the  physical  objects  nature 
will be strongly studied to determine if it is appropriate to include it in-depth as part 
of  the  proposed  process.  In  this  way,  the  authors  envision  such  strategy  could  help 
Augmented Objects designers to identify some particular requirements that could be 
addressed directly by them, e.g., they can match particular kinds of requirements to 
functionalities  that  will  be  included  in  objects.  Thus,  it  is  possible  to  conceive 
“functionality  patterns”  that  would  ease  the  analysis  of  the  candidate  objects,  by 
considering the physical context of the final user.  

Acknowledgements 
This  work  was  partially  supported  by  Fondecyt  (Chile),  grants  Nº:  1090352  and 
11060467,  LACCIR  grants  No.  R0308LAC001  and  R0308LAC005,  and  Proyecto 
Enlace VID 2010 (University of Chile), Grant ENL 10/10. 

References 

[Abascal  et  al.  2007]  Abascal-González,  J.,  Lafuente-Rojo,  A.,  Cai,  Y.,  and  Gross,  T.: 
“Ambient Intelligence Today”. Upgrade 8, 4, Novatica, August (2007), 4-6. 
[Adidas 2010] Adidas: “Project Fusion”, http://www.adidas-polar.com, Last visit: May (2010). 
[Aguilera 2006a] Aguilera, F., Alarcón, R., Collazos, C., Guerrero, L.A.: “A Cognitive Model 
of  User  Interaction  as  a  Guideline  for  Designing  Novel  Interfaces”.  In  Advanced  Software 
Engineering:  Expanding  the  Frontiers  of  Software  Technology,  IFIP  International  Federation 
for Information Processing, Vol. 219, Springer, (2006), 62-76. 
[Aguilera  2006b]  Aguilera,  F.,  Neyem,  A.,  Alarcón,  R.,  Collazos,  C.,  Guerrero,  L.A.: 
“Rethinking the Design of Enriched Environments”. Proc. of  PerSys'06, LNCS 4278, Springer 
Verlag, Montpellier, France, October (2006), 1305-1314. 
[Alaman  et  al.  2007]  Alamán,  X.,  Ballesteros,  F.,  Bravo,  J.,  Fernández,  D.:  “Ambient 
Intelligence at Home: Facts and Future”. In Cepis Upgrade: Ambient Intelligence. Novatica, 8, 
4, (2007), 13-18. 
[Alarcon et al. 2006] Alarcón, R., Guerrero, L. A., Ochoa, S.F., Pino, J: “Analysis and Design 
of Mobile Collaborative Applications using Contextual Elements”. Computing and Informatics, 
25, 6, (2006), 469-496.  
[Ananny and Cassel 2001] Ananny, M., Cassell, J.: “Telling Tales: A new toy for encouraging 
written  literacy  through  oral  storytelling”.  In:  Society  for  Research  in  Child  Development, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota, April (2001). 
[Arroyo  et  al.  2008]  Arroyo,  R.F.,  Gea,  M.,  Garrido,  J.L.,  Haya,  P.A.:“Development  of 
Ambient  Intelligence  Systems  Based  on  Collaborative  Task  Models”,  Journal  of  Universal 
Computer Science, 14, 9, (2008), 1545–1559. 
[Becker  et  al.  2004]  Becker  C.,  Handte,  M.,  Schiele,  G.,  Rothermelet,  K.:  “PCOM  –  A 
Component System for Pervasive Computing”, Proc. of PerCom'04, USA, March (2004). 
[Bonanni  et  al.  2006]  Bonanni,  L.,  Vaucelle,  C.,  Lieberman,  J.,  Zuckerman,  O.:  “PlayPals: 
Tangible Interfaces for Remote Communication and Play”, Proc. of ACM CHI’06, Montreal, 
Canada, April (2006). 

Guerrero L.A., Ochoa S.F., Horta H.: Developing Augmented Objects ...

1631

[Bravo  et  al.  2006]  Bravo,  J.,  Hervás,  R.,  Sánchez,  I.,  Chavira,  G.,  Nava,  S.:”Visualization 
Services in a Conference Context: An Approach by RFID Technology", Journal of Universal 
Computer Science 12, 3, (2006), 270-283.  
[Bravo et al. 2008] Bravo, J., López-de-Ipiña, D., Fuentes, C., Hervás, R., Peña, R., Vergara, 
M., Casero, G.: “Enabling NFC Technology for Supporting Chronic Diseases: A Proposal for 
Alzheimer Caregivers”. Proc. of AmI’08, LNCS 5355, (2008), 109-125. 
[Chen et al. 2004] Chen, H., Perich, F., Finin, T., and Joshi, A.: “SOUPA: Standard ontology 
for ubiquitous and pervasive application”. Technical Report, University of Maryland, (2004). 
[Ducatel et al. 2001] Ducatel K., Bogdanowicz, M., Scapolo, F., Leitjen, J., Burgelman, J. C.: 
“Scenarios for Ambient Intelligence”. In 2010, Tech. Report, Information Society Technologies 
Advisory Group (ISTAG), Inst. of Prospective Technological Studies, (2001) 
[Fogg 2002] Fogg, B.J.: “Persuasive Technology: Using Computers to Change What We Think 
and Do”. Science & Technology Books, vol. 224, (2002).  
[Fuentes et al. 2006] Fuentes, L., Jiménez, D., Pinto, M.:“Development of Ambient Intelligence 
Applications using Components and Aspects”. J. of Univ. Comp. Science 12,3,(2006),236–251.  
[Gasca et al. 2009] Gasca, E., Favela, J., Tentori, M.: “Assisting Support Groups of Patients 
with Chronic Diseases through Persuasive Comp.”. J. of Univ. Comp. Science, 15,16, (2009). 
[Guerrero et al. 2006] Guerrero, L.A., Ochoa, S.F., Pino, J.A., Collazos, C.: “Selecting Devices 
to Support Mobile Collaboration”. Group Decision and Negotiation, 15, 3, (2006), 243-271. 
[Henderson  and  Feiner  2009]  Henderson,  S.J.,  and  Feiner,  S.:  “Evaluating  the  benefits  of 
augmented reality for task localization in maintenance of an armoured personnel carrier turret”. 
Proc. of IEEE Int. Symp. on Mixed and Augm. Reality, Science and Tech., IEEE Press, (2009). 
[Henricksen  et  al.  2002]  Henricksen,  K.,  Indulska,  J.  and  Rakotonirainy,  A.:  “Modelling 
Context Information in Pervasive Computing”, Proc. of Pervasive’02, LNCS 2414, (2002). 
[Ibrahim et al. 2007] Ibrahim, N., Le Mouël, F., Frénot, S.: "C-ANIS: a contextual, automatic 
and dynamic service-oriented integration framework", Proc. of UCS’07, Tokyo, Japan, LNCS 
4836, (2007), 118-133. 
[Ishii et al. 1997] Ishii, H., Ullmer, B.: “Tangible Bits: Towards Seamless Interfaces Between 
People, Bits and Atoms”. Proc. of ACM CHI’97, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, (1997). 
[Livingston  et  al.  2002]  Livingston,  M.A.,  et  al.:  “An  augmented  reality  system  for  military 
operations in urban terrain”. Proc. of I/ITSEC’02), Orlando, USA, (2002). 
[Lopez de Ipiña et al. 2006] López de Ipiña, D., Vázquez, J.I., García, D., Fernández, J., García, 
I., Sainz, D., Almeida, A.:“EMI²lets: A Reflective Framework for Enabling AmI”. Journal of 
Universal Computer Science 12, 3, (2006), 297-314.  
[Lopez de Ipiña et al. 2009] Lopez de Ipiña, D., Diaz-de-Sarralde, I., Bravo, J.: “Twitting Care 
Events:  Assessing  the  Data-on-Tag  approach  in  NFC-supported  AAL”.  Actas  de  las  3ras 
Jornadas Científicas sobre RFID, Nov. (2009), 117-132. 
[Misook  and  Jeunwoo  2007]    Misook,  S.,  Jeunwoo,  L.:  “UP  health:  ubiquitously  persuasive 
health promotion with an instant messaging system”. Proc. of ACM CHI’07, ACM Press, San 
Jose, CA, USA (2007).  
[MIT  2010]  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology  (MIT):  “House_n  Initiative”,  URL: 
http://architecture.mit.edu/house_n/index.html. Last visit: May (2010). 

1632

Guerrero L.A., Ochoa S.F., Horta H.: Developing Augmented Objects ...

and  Burton: 

“Audex 

Inc.:  “Products 

and  Burton  2010]  Motorola 

for  USB  Sensing  and  Control”.  URL: 

[Motorola 
Jacket”,  URL: 
www.motorola.com/motoinfo/product/details.jsp?globalObjectId=168, Last visit: May (2010). 
[Nike 2010] Nike: “Nike + iPod”, http://www.apple.com/ipod/nike/, Last visit: May (2010). 
[Oakley 2010] Oakley.: “Men's Wearable Electronics”, URL: http://oakley.com/o/c771s. Last 
visit: May (2010). 
[Park et al. 2008] Park, H.M., Lee, S.H., and Choi, J.S.: “Wearable augmented reality system 
using gaze interaction”, Proc. of MIXER’08, Cambridge, UK, September (2008), 175-176. 
[Patten  et  al.  2006]  Patten,  J.,  Recht,  B.,  Ishii,  H.:  “Interaction  Techniques  for  Musical 
Performance with Tabletop Tangible Interfaces”, Proc of ACE’06, Calif., USA, June (2006). 
[Phidget  2010]  Phidget, 
http://www.phidgets.com/products.php?category=18. Last visit: May (2010). 
[Ryokai  et  al.  2004]  Ryokai,  K.,  Marti,  S.,  Ishii,  H.:  “I/O  Brush:  Drawing  with  Everyday 
Objects as Ink”, Proc of the ACM CHI’04, Boston, USA, April (2004). 
[Sanchez et al. 2008] Sánchez, D., Tentori, M., Favela, J.: “Activity Recognition for the Smart 
Hospital”. IEEE Intelligent Systems 23, 2, (2008), 50-57.  
[Vázquez  and  Lopez  de  Ipiña,  2005]  Vázquez,  I.  and  Lopez  de  Ipiña  D.:  “Inteligencia 
Ambiental: la presencia invisible”. Solo Programadores  127, (2005), 16-19. 
[Villareal et al. 2009] Villarreal, V., Laguna, L., López, S.,  Fontecha, J., Fuentes, C., Hervás, 
R.,  López-de-Ipiña,  D.,  Bravo,  J.:  “A  Proposal  for  Mobile  Diabetes  Self-control:  Towards  a 
Patient Monitoring Framework”. Proc. of IWANN’09, (2009), 870-877. 
[Welbourne, et al. 2009] Welbourne, E., Battle, L., Cole, G., Gould, K., Rector, K., Rayner, S., 
Balazinska,  M.,  and  Borriello,  G.:  “Building  the  Internet  of  Things  using  DFID:  The  RFID 
Ecosystem Experience”. IEEE Internet Computing, May/June (2009), 48-55.  
[Weiser  1993]  Weiser,  M.:  “Ubiquitous  Computing,  Hot  Topics”.  IEEE  Computer,  26,  10, 
(1993) 71-72. 
[Yen-Hung Chen et al. 2008] Yen-Hung Chen, I., MacDonald, B. and Wusche, B.: “Markerless 
Augmented Reality for Robotics Helicopter Appl.”. Proc. of RobVis’08, LNCS 4931, (2008). 

