CLEI ELECTRONIC JOURNAL, VOLUME 14, NUMBER 3, PAPER 0, DECEMBER 2011 

 

Preface to the SCCC'2010 Special Issue 

Sergio F. Ochoa1, Federico Meza2, Ignacio Casas3 

 

1 Department of Computer Science, Universidad de Chile, Chile, sochoa@dcc.uchile.cl 

2 Department of Computer Science, Universidad de Talca, Chile, fmeza@utalca.cl 
3 Department of Computer Science, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Chile, 

icasas@ing.puc.cl 

 

This  special  issue  of  the  CLEI  Electronic  Journal  consists  of  extended  and  revised  versions  of 
articles presented at the XXIX International Conference of the Chilean Computer Science Society, 
which took place in Antofagasta, Chile, in November 2010. 
  
The  conference  received  100  submissions,  from  which  the  program  committee  selected  45  for 
presentation.  Among  the  presented  articles  the  conference  chairs  selected  12  papers,  which  were 
extended  and  revised  for  the  CLEI  Electronic  Journal.  Such  selection  was  done  based  on  the 
articles  evaluation  score  and  the  recommendation  of  the  conference  sessions  chairs.  After  two 
reviewing rounds seven articles were accepted to be published in this special issue. 
 
Three of these articles deal with structural challenges from software systems: 
 
The  paper  1,  by  Juan  Manuel  Rodriguez,  Marco  Crasso,  Cristian  Mateos,  Alejandro  Zunino  and 
Marcelo  Campo,  presents  a  catalog  of  guidelines  to  build  service-oriented  applications  and 
services.  The  article  also  describes  a  plug-in  for  the  Eclipse  IDE,  which  simplifies  the  use  of  the 
guidelines. 
 
The  paper  2,  by  Eduardo  B.  Fernandez  and  Sergio  Mujica,  proposes  a  model-based  approach  to 
propagate security restrictions in two dimensions: along the lifecycle and the architectural levels of 
a  system.  This  approach  facilitates  the  security  analysis  of  the  system  and  can  be  used  to  verify 
compliance of such system with particular regulations.  
 
The  paper  3,  by  Verónica  Bogado,  Silvio  Gonnet  and  Horacio  Leone,  presents  a  discrete  events 
simulation model for evaluating quality attributes, using the software architecture of a system. The 
evaluation results help software architects to make accurate decisions about the system design. 
 
Three selected articles mix algorithms and artificial intelligence to reach several goals: 
 
The paper 4, by Manuel Bozzo, Martín Gutierrez and Tomas Bozzo, describes a system named JGAVIS 
that finds effects to imitate voice signals. The system addresses most limitations existing in 
its predecessor known as GAVIS (Genetic Algorithm based Voice Imitation System). 
 
The  paper  5,  by  Thelma  Elita  Colanzi,  Wesley  Klewerton  Guez  Assunção,  Aurora  Trinidad 
Ramirez Pozo, Ana Cristina B. Kochem Vendramin, Diogo Augusto Barros Pereira, Carlos Alberto 
Zorzo, and Pedro Luiz de Paula Filho, explores three different bio-inspired metaheuristics to deal 
with the clustering problem. Moreover the article proposes some refinements to be applied to these 
metaheuristics in order to improve their performance.  
 

CLEI ELECTRONIC JOURNAL, VOLUME 14, NUMBER 3, PAPER 0, DECEMBER 2011 

 

The paper 6, by Matias Lee and Pedro R. D'Argenio, introduces and defines semantics to the notion 
of  observability  of  interactive  systems.  This  approach  gives  important  insight  about  the  security 
model of an interactive system. 
 
Finally, the last paper addresses the challenge of analyzing the formalization of the scrum software 
process: 
 
The paper 7, by Julio Ariel Hurtado Alegría, María Cecilia Bastarrica and Alexandre Bergel, shows 
how  the  use  of  a  software  tool  named  AVISPA  can  help  analyze  the  specification  of  the  scrum 
software  process.  Such  tool  can  be  also  used  to  analyze  other  software  processes  in  order  to  find 
error patterns. 
 
The guest editors want to thank all people involved in this special issue, particularly to the authors 
and  the  reviewers  that  spent  an  important  effort  to  make  possible  this  new  number  of  the  CLEI 
Electronic  Journal.  We  want  also  thanks  to  Editor-in-Chief  of  the  journal  for  offering  us  the 
opportunity of preparing this special issue. We hope that you enjoy the reading! 
 
Sergio F. Ochoa, Federico Meza and Ignacio Casas, special issue editors 
 
October 2011 
 
 

