Exploring the Dynamics of Linked Data

Tobias K¨afer1, Ahmed Abdelrahman2, J¨urgen Umbrich2,

Patrick O’Byrne2, and Aidan Hogan2

1 Institute AIFB, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany

2 Digital Enterprise Research Institute, National University of Ireland, Galway

Abstract. Little is known about the dynamics of Linked Data, primarily 
because there have been few, if any, suitable collections of data made
available for analysis of how Linked Data documents evolve over time. We
aim to address this issue. We propose the Dynamic Linked Data Observatory,
 which provides the community with such a collection, monitoring
a ﬁxed set of Linked Data documents at weekly intervals. We have now
collected eight months of raw data comprising weekly snapshots of eighty
thousand Linked Data documents. Having published results characterising 
the high-level dynamics of Linked Data, we now wish to disseminate
results: we wish to investigate how results from our experiment might
beneﬁt the community and what online services and statistics (relating
to Linked Data dynamics) would be most useful for us to provide.

Summary

The Web of (Linked) Data is dynamic. Knowledge about Linked Data dynamics
is important for a wide range of applications and can help to answer a wide
variety of practical questions, including (but far from limited to):

For warehouses: Which remote datasets need to be updated most frequently?
Which are static and do not need to be refreshed? Are the updates mostly
additions or mostly deletions? How often do new documents appear?

For “live query” engines: Which documents are static and can be cached?
Which query patterns involve dynamic patterns (e.g., are foaf:knows triples
more dynamic than foaf:name)? For link traversal methods, how often do
links change between documents?

For reasoning engines: Do schema data change more or less often than instance 
data? Which ontologies are the most dynamic? What kinds of semantics 
change? Are changes “monotonic” with respect to entailments? Which
data are static and subject to materialisation? Which are dynamic and subject 
to query-rewriting?

For publishers: How often do target documents go oﬄine? How often should
deadlinks be checked and pruned? How often should certain link-types (e.g.,
owl:sameAs) be revised for updated remote content? How often do the semantics 
of vocabularies change?

Few works have looked at the nature of Linked Data dynamics or have tried
to answer the types of questions posed above; this is probably due to to a lack

P. Cimiano et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2013, LNCS 7955, pp. 302–303, 2013.
c(cid:2) Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013

Exploring the Dynamics of Linked Data

303

of suitable collections tracking changes in Linked Data documents over time.
Thus, we proposed the Dynamic Linked Data Observatory (DyLDO) [2,1] for
monitoring weekly changes in 86, 696 Linked Data documents.

We recently published results (in the main track of ESWC) based on initial
analyses of the ﬁrst six months of data that we have collected. These results
begin to answer some of the questions listed above [1]. For example, therein:

1. We showed that 5% of documents went oﬄine in six months, establishing an

initial estimated death-rate for Linked Data documents.

2. We showed that the content of 62.2% of the monitored documents did not
change in six months, and that most of the remaining documents either
changed very infrequently (23.2%) or very frequently (8.4%).

3. We identiﬁed four types of data-sites: Static involving few infrequently
changing documents, including linkedmdb.org; Dual involving a few frequently 
updated documents, including, loc.gov; Bulk involving many infrequently 
updated documents, including dbpedia.org; and Active involving
many frequently updated documents, including dbtropes.org.

4. Of those documents that changed at least once, we showed that one quarter
only ever updated individual values (often an object literal), one quarter only
ever added new triples, and that the other half contained a mix of change
types. We also showed, e.g., that the schema signature of a document (set
of class and property terms used) rarely changes.

5. Links in the monitored documents are quite static over time, with the exception 
of a few domains such as sec.gov, identi.ca, zitgist.com, dbtropes.org
and freebase.com that regularly contribute a small volume of fresh links.

We would now like to disseminate our collection and our results for the beneﬁt
of the community. We wish to collect use-cases for statistics on Linked Data
dynamics that we can extract from our collection and provide online. We are
currently working on a live site that visualises changes in Linked Data sites and
allows interested users to see changes happen on a weekly basis, where they
occur, and what types of changes they are (http://swse.deri.org/dyldo).
We are also in the process of creating a SPARQL service that indexes details
of weekly changes represented as RDF. This would enable external systems to
ﬁnd out which Linked Data sites were updated in the previous week(s) and what
types of changes they exhibited. We hope that warehouses, live query engines,
reasoners and publishers could then use our API to directly answer many of the
questions about Linked Data dynamics highlighted at the outset.

References

1. K¨afer, T., Abdelrahman, A., Umbrich, J., O’Byrne, P., Hogan, A.: Observing Linked
Data Dynamics. In: Cimiano, P., Corcho, O., Presutti, V., Hollink, L., Rudolph, S.
(eds.) ESWC 2013. LNCS, vol. 7882, pp. 213–227. Springer, Heidelberg (2013)

2. K¨afer, T., Umbrich, J., Hogan, A., Polleres, A.: DyLDO: Towards a Dynamic Linked

Data Observatory. In: LDOW at WWW. CEUR-WS, vol. 937 (2012)

