Welcome to the Proceedings of the 7th International Workshop 

Semantic Web Applications and Tools for Life Sciences  

on  

(SWAT4LS 2014) 

 

 

Preface 

It is our great pleasure to welcome you to the 7th International Workshop on Semantic Web 
Applications  and  Tools  for  Life  Sciences  (SWAT4LS  2014).  SWAT4LS  is  an  international 
workshop  to  meet  and  to  present  high-quality  research  results  and  relevant  demos, 
applications and tutorials from all fields of Semantic Web technologies in Life Sciences.  

The  objectives  of  the  SWAT4LS  workshop  are  to  provide  a  forum  dedicated  to  the 
dissemination of original research, the discussion of practical insights, and the reporting on 
relevant  experience  relating  to  the  adoption  of  Web  based  information  systems  and 
Semantic technologies in biomedical informatics and computational biology. The workshop 
also aims at providing a forum to exchange ideas, for example, through poster papers and 
demo papers. 

SWAT4LS  2014  was  organized  at  Freie  Universtität  Berlin,  December  9-11,  2014,  Berlin, 
Germany. 

The  call  for  papers  solicited  research  contributions  in  eHealth,  biomedical  and  clinical 
informatics,  systems  biology,  computational  biology,  drug  discovery,  bioinformatics  and 
biocomputing.  The  call  for  contributions  attracted  39  submissions from  around the  globe. 
The technical program shows a carefully selected presentation of research and development 
in  8  full  papers,  4  short  talks  and  2  position  papers,  9  demos  and  7  posters.  These  were 
complemented by 6 tutorials and 3 keynote talks provided by:  
 
Keynotes 

•  Andre Dekker, MAASTRO Clinic, NL 

Knowledge Engineering in Radiation Oncology – A real-world application of 
Semantic Web technology 

•  Stefan Decker, Insight Centre for Data Analytics, IE 
•  Maryann Martone, UCSD, USA 

Data-Knowledge Transition Zones within the Biomedical Research Ecosystem 
 
 
Tutorials 

•  Simon Jupp and James Malone, EMBL-EBI 

RDF linked data at the European Bioinformatics Institute 

•  Ratnesh Sahay, Insight Centre for Data Analytics 

Ontologising the Health Level Seven (HL7) Standard 

•  Martin Rezk, Free University of Bozen-Bolzano 

Ontologies Ontop Databases 

•  Eric Prud’hommeaux, World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) 

• 

RDF validation and transformation using Shape Expressions 
Jin-Dong Kim, Database Center for Life Science (DBCLS) 
Natural Language Interfaces for SPARQL endpoints 

•  Adrian Paschke and Ralph Schäfermeier, Freie Universtität Berlin 

Introduction to rule systems 

 
The  SWAT4LS  2014  organizers  were  pleased  to  note  the  increasingly  applied  nature  of 
submissions,  with  the  increasing  experience  of  the  community  demonstrated  by  an 
abundance of running implementations. To place emphasis on the practical use of Semantic 
Web technologies in Life Sciences, SWAT4LS 2014 again included a one day Hackathon. 
 

The SWAT4LS 2014 organizers wish to thank the excellent program committee for their hard 
work  in  reviewing  the  submitted  papers.  Their  criticism  and  very  useful  comments  and 
suggestions were instrumental to achieve a high quality of publication. We also thank the 
workshop authors for submitting good papers, responding to the reviewers’ comments, and 
abiding  by  our  proceedings  production  schedule.  We  further  wish  to  thank  the  keynote 
speakers to contribute their interesting talks. We are very grateful to our sponsors the Freie 
Universtität Berlin, National Centre for Biomedical Ontology, Ontoforce, Corporate Semantic 
Web, Journal of Biomedical Semantics, and W3C.  
 

Berlin, Germany, December 2014, 

Adrian Paschke, Albert Burger, Paolo Romano, M. Scott Marshall, Andrea Splendiani 

 

