Game-Based Notions of Locality

over Finite Models

Marcelo Arenas, Pablo Barcel´o, and Leonid Libkin

Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto

{marenas, pablo, libkin}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract. Locality notions in logic say that the truth value of a formula 
can be determined locally, by looking at the isomorphism type of a
small neighborhood of its free variables. Such notions have proved to be
useful in many applications. They all, however, refer to isomorphism of
neighborhoods, which most local logics cannot test for. A more relaxed
notion of locality says that the truth value of a formula is determined by
what the logic itself can say about that small neighborhood. Or, since
most logics are characterized by games, the truth value of a formula is
determined by the type, with respect to a game, of that small neighborhood.
 Such game-based notions of locality can often be applied when
traditional isomorphism-based locality cannot.

Our goal is to study game-based notions of locality. We work with an
abstract view of games that subsumes games for many logics. We look
at three, progressively more complicated locality notions. The easiest
requires only very mild conditions on the game and works for most logics
of interest. The other notions, based on Hanf’s and Gaifman’s theorems,
require more restrictions. We state those restrictions and give examples of
logics that satisfy and fail the respective game-based notions of locality.

1

Introduction

Locality is a property of logics that ﬁnds its origins in the work by Hanf [13]
and Gaifman [10], and that was shown to be very useful in the context of ﬁnite
model theory. Locality is primarily used in two ways: for proving inexpressibility
results, and for establishing normal forms for logical formulae. The former has
led to new easy winning strategies in logical games [6, 8, 20], with applications
in descriptive complexity (e.g., the study of monadic NP and its relatives [8],
or circuit complexity classes [21]), in databases (e.g., establishing bounds on the
expressiveness of aggregate queries [16], or on query rewriting in data integration
and exchange [7, 1]), and in formal languages (e.g., in characterizing subclasses
of star-free languages [27]). Local normal forms like those in [10, 25] have found
many applications as well, for example, in the design of low-complexity modelchecking 
algorithms [9, 12, 26], in automata theory [25] and in computing weakest
preconditions for database transactions [2].

There are two closely related ways of stating locality of logical formulae. One,
originating in Hanf’s work [13], says that if two structures A and B realize the

J. Marcinkowski and A. Tarlecki (Eds.): CSL 2004, LNCS 3210, pp. 175–189, 2004.
c(cid:1) Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

176

M. Arenas et al.

same multiset of isomorphism types of neighborhoods of radius d, then they
agree on a given sentence Φ. Here d depends only on Φ.

The notion of locality inspired by Gaifman’s theorem [10] says that if the
d-neighborhoods of two tuples ¯a1 and ¯a2 in a structure A are isomorphic, then
A |= ϕ(¯a1) ↔ ϕ(¯a2). Again, d depends on ϕ, and not on A.

If all formulae in a logic are local, it is easy to prove bounds on its expressive
power. For example, connectivity violates the Hanf notion of locality, as one
cycle of length 2m and two disjoint cycles of length m realize the same multiset
of isomorphism types of neighborhoods of radius d as long as m > 2d + 1.
Likewise, the transitive closure of a graph violates the Gaifman notion of locality:
in the graph in Fig. 1, one can ﬁnd two elements a, b such that the radius-d
neighborhoods of (a, b) and (b, a) are isomorphic, and yet the transitive closure
distinguishes these tuples.

...

...

2d

a

...

...

...

...

2d

b

...

...

Fig. 1. Locality and transitive closure

These notions of locality, while very useful in many applications, have one
deﬁciency: they all refer to isomorphism of neighborhoods, which is a very strong
property (typically not expressible in a logic that satisﬁes one of the locality
properties). There are situations when these notions are not applicable simply
because structures do not have enough isomorphic neighborhoods! One example
was given in [21] which discussed applicability of locality techniques to the study
of small parallel complexity classes: consider a directed tree in which all non-leaf
nodes have diﬀerent out-degrees. Then locality techniques cannot be used to
derive any results about logics over such trees.

Intuitively, it seems that requiring isomorphism of neighborhoods is too much.
Suppose we are dealing with ﬁrst-order logic FO, which is local in the sense of
Gaifman. For a structure A, it appears that if FO itself cannot see the diﬀerence
between two large enough neighborhoods of points a and b in A, then it should
not be able to see the diﬀerence between elements a and b in A. That is, for a
given formula ϕ(x), if radius-d neighborhoods of a and b cannot be distinguished
by suﬃciently many FO formulae, then A |= ϕ(a) ↔ ϕ(b).

Gaifman’s theorem [10] actually implies that this is the case: if ϕ is of quantiﬁer 
rank k, then there exist numbers d and l, dependent on k only, such that
if radius-d neighborhoods of a and b cannot be distinguished by formulae of
quantiﬁer rank l, then A |= ϕ(a) ↔ ϕ(b).

In fact, it seems that if a logic is local (say, in the sense of Gaifman), then
for each formula ϕ there is a number d such that if the logic cannot distinguish
radius-d neighborhoods of ¯a and ¯b, then ϕ(¯a) ↔ ϕ(¯b).

The goal of this paper is to introduce such notions of locality based on logical 
indistinguishability of neighborhoods, and see if they apply to logics that

