Supporting Unstructured Activities in Crisis 

Management: A Collaboration Model and Prototype to 

Improve Situation Awareness 

Cláudio Sapateiro1, Pedro Antunes2, Gustavo Zurita 3,  

Nelson Baloian4, and Rodrigo Vogt 3 

1 Systems and Informatics Department, Superior School of Technology,  

Polytechnic Institute of Setúbal, 2914 Setúbal, Portugal 

csapateiro@est.ips.pt 

2 Department of Informatics, Faculty of Sciences of the University of Lisbon, 

3 Management Control and Information Systems Department, Business School, 

Lisbon, Portugal  

paa@di.fc.ul.pt 

Universidad de Chile  

gnzurita@fen.uchile.cl, rodrigovogt@gmail.com 

4 Computer Science Department, Engineering School, 

Universidad de Chile 

nbaloian@dcc.uchile.cl 

Abstract. In this paper we explore the construction of Situation Awareness using 
 a  collection  of  mobile,  collaborative  and  visual-interactive  devices.  These 
devices provide a shared workspace where multiple users may correlate information 
 about  the  problematic  situation  at  hand  and  organize  the  unstructured 
activities necessary to handle the situation. A PDA prototype of these mobile, 
collaborative and visual-interactive devices has already been developed with the 
purpose  to  evaluate  the  feasibility  of  the  collaboration  model.  The  paper  describes 
 the  collaboration  model  and  presents  an  application  scenario  in  the 
emergency management area currently being used to evaluate the prototype.  

Keywords:  Crisis  Management,  Unstructured  Work  Activities,  Collaboration, 
Situation Awareness. 

1   Introduction 

Organizations  orchestrate  their  work  along  a  continuum  of  structured  and  unstructured 
 activities  [1,  2],  trying  to  balance  quite  different  and  sometimes  contradictory 
criteria such as productivity and responsiveness. Structured activities are designed a 
priori based on work models addressing coordination issues, productivity, efficiency 
and consistency. Information Systems (IS) have traditionally been developed with the 
purpose to automate as much as possible such work models, relieving humans from 
the coordination effort.  

Unfortunately many unknown variables, both external (e.g., market dynamics and 
natural disasters) and internal (e.g., latent problems, emergent work processes or lack 

J. Löffler and M. Klann (Eds.): Mobile Response, LNCS 5424, pp. 101–111, 2009. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009 

102 

C. Sapateiro et al. 

of flexibility in work structures), are among the factors that may lead to automation 
failures  and  lack  of  support  of  existing  IS  to  unstructured  work  activities  occurring 
when facing  unplanned, emergent or highly  fluid scenarios. An example of such an 
unstructured  scenario  is  crisis  management.  A  crisis  is  an  unexpected,  unfamiliar 
chain or combination of events, causing uncertainty of action and time-pressure [3]. 
In these situations, beyond the scope of work models and contingency plans, people 
engage in informal relationships and make use of their tacit knowledge in an opportunistic 
manner. [4] highlights several characteristics of these emergent processes: no 
best  structure  or  sequence;  typically  distributed;  dynamically  evolving;  actor  roles 
unpredictable; and unpredictable contexts. 

The  concept  of  resilience,  which  may  be  characterized  as  a  comprehensive  endeavor 
towards increased resistance and flexibility dealing with crisis situations [5-7], 
should be a concern of IS development. The purpose is to deploy IS capable to preserve 
 work consistency and effectiveness in  unpredicted scenarios extending far beyond 
the predefined work models. 

From an analysis of the proceedings of the International Community on Information 
Systems for Crisis Response and Management conferences (ISCRAM) between 
2004 and 2006, some recurrent concerns in dealing with crisis situations were identi-
fied: shared awareness of the situation; information and knowledge representation and 
management; usability and interface design concerns. [8] and [9] also pointed out that 
communication,  information  management  and  the  construction  of  Situation  Awareness 
(SA) are major issues to consider when addressing crises situations.  

Our research aims to  study the IS support to unstructured activities based on the 
collaborative  construction  of  SA.  In  the  next  section  we  present  some  related  work 
that influenced our approach. In Section Three we present our IS approach to support 
unstructured work activities. That discussion is continued in Section Four with a description 
 of  the  developed  prototype.  Then,  in  Section  Five,  we  discus  a  possible 
application scenario: Emergency Management. Finally, in Section Six we draw some 
conclusions from our research and point future work directions.  

2   Related Work 

We may find several projects in the research literature addressing the gap from fully 
structured  activities  to  ad-hoc  unstructured  activities,  e.g.,  [2,  10,  11].  These  works 
fundamentally  studied  how  to  bring  the  IS  back  to  model  guidance  after  deviations 
caused  by  unpredicted  events.  The  problem  addressed  by  our  research  goes  beyond 
this perspective towards the support of emergent collaborative work structures, where 
models do not serve as prescriptions but rather as artifacts that may help getting the 
work done [12, 13].  

Our proposal relies in a constructivist approach to SA. The support to unstructured 
activities is grounded in the collaborative construction of SA, relying upon the IS to 
maintain up to date and shared information about the situation.  

The most popular definition of SA is from [14], which states that: Situation awareness 
 is  the  perception  of  elements  in  the  environment  within  a  volume  of  time  and 
space,  the  comprehension  of  their  meaning,  and  the  projection  of  their  status  in  the 
near future. This perspective over SA regards perception, comprehension and projection 
as three essential dimensions. 

 

Supporting Unstructured Activities in Crisis Management 

103 

The support to SA has received considerable attention in the Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work (CSCW) research field [15-18]. However, the vast majority of this 
research has  focused in specific context/domain proposals, and also in a functionaloriented 
perspective, while in our research we emphasize a process perspective, considering 
the resources and activities necessary to obtain, manage and use SA information 
in crisis scenarios. 

Team members should not only be able to monitor and analyze SA, but also anticipate 
the SA needs of their colleagues. Hence, [19] defines “team SA” as SA plus the 
mutual adjustment of one and another’s minds as they interact as a team in a specific 
context of action. Rather than considering teams as groups of self-organized people, 
we should regard them as communities of practice, which encompasses broader issues 
such as practices, norms and rituals [20].  

Designing computational support to the teams’ dynamics constitutes a tremendous 
challenge. We have considered two issues as key design requirements in addressing 
crisis  situations:  (1)  a  minimal  work  overhead  demand;  and  (2)  a  rich  information 
visualization  schema.  [15,  21-23]  regard  information  visualization  as  a  fundamental 
mean to enhance cognition and information interpretation.  

Finally, we should also consider research on contexts of action characterization and 
representation.  Research  in  this  area  has  been  polarized  around  two  main  perspec-
tives: positivist and phenomenological [24]. The positivist perspective, which is traditionally 
 adopted  by  the  engineering  fields,  regards  context  as  a  stable  information 
entity  and  separable  from  action.  In  our  research  we  adopt  the  phenomenological 
perspective, with strong roots in social sciences, which regards context as a relational 
entity relating all involved actions and objects, and evolving dynamically as actions 
unfold [25]. 

3   Proposed Approach 

Our proposed approach to assist emergent work activities consists in a collaboration 
model  supported  in  a  set  of  shared  visual-interactive  artifacts  named  Situation  Matrixes 
(SM). The proposed collaboration model is inspired in several resilience engineering 
 principles  [7,  26]  emphasizing:  redundancy  regarding  existing  IS,  power 
deference among the involved actors, situated action and shared situation awareness. 
In our approach we aim to enhance the individual contributions to the overall situation 
understanding and handling.  By allowing each involved actor to contribute to situation 
 handling,  we  promote  the  externalization  of  knowledge  flows  [27],  and  actors’ 
tacit knowledge and experience. The sharing of individual assessments  will also  facilitate 
collective sensemaking [28] and situated framing [13, 29].  

For  the  construction  of  this  shared  artifact  we  adopted  a  situation  characterization 
framework consisting of a set of Situation Dimensions (SD). Samples of situation dimensions 
 may  include:  involved  actors,  required  actions,  needed  resources,  events, 
goals, situational attributes, etc. For a given application domain, an initial set of relevant 
dimensions may be adopted and later on dynamically redefined, as an unplanned situation 
unfolds. These dimensions may be completely created and redefined in real time.  

The SD are correlated in Situation Matrixes (SM), e.g., Actions versus Actors, Actor 
 versus  Allocated  Resources,  Goals  versus  Actions,  etc.  as  several  SM  may  be 

104 

C. Sapateiro et al. 

necessary to express complex SD correlations. The SM concept was inspired by the 
Swiss Cheese model of accidents [30], which posits that for an incident to progress, 
several organizational layers of defense are crossed trough existing holes,  due active 
or  latent  failure  conditions.    Our  proposed  SM  artifact  aims  to  allow  the  mitigation 
strategy be composed by the alignment of SD that will prevent the incident from progressing.
  

The SM may also be defined and organized in layers as the action unfolds.  
Our specific implementation of the SM was inspired by the perspective proposed 
by  [31],  which  uses  several  types  of  matrixes  to  visualize  qualitative  data,  for  in-
stance:  concept  cluster  matrixes,  empirical  matrixes,  and  temporal  or  event  driven 
matrixes. In our approach the SD correlations are specified in the SM as circles, using 
different sizes and/or colors to express the perceived strengths (see Figure 1a). Several 
alternatives may be considered to express the semantic meaning of such correlations,
 but in our approach we leave the concrete semantics definition to the experts of 
the possible application domains. 

 

Fig. 1. Situation Matrixes (SM): a) Sample of SM; b) SM evolution 

 

The collection of SM constitutes a shared workspace accomplishing several goals: 
provide a situation representation shared by the team; support collective and individual 
action; serve as a monitor/feedback mechanism; and also deliver information in a 
flexible and manageable way.  

As the situation evolves, the SM may include more SD items (e.g., more actors involved,
 more actions, more situation attributes), with different correlations, and new 
SM may also be added to the pool (see Figure 1b). 

4   Prototype 

In this section we present the current status of the prototype development. The prototype 
supports managing the SM described in the previous section, allowing the collaborative 
creation, sharing and organization of SD correlations. Since mobility may 

 

Supporting Unstructured Activities in Crisis Management 

105 

constitute a key requirement to support emergent work activities, the prototype operates 
seamlessly with Tablet PC and PDA. Keeping in mind that a minimal overhead is 
a necessary requirement, the manipulation of SM was designed to be as fast and simple 
as possible, without limiting the potential to describe and share the different views 
of the emergent situation that people may have.  

The prototype does not support different roles in order to stay as simple and flexible 
as possible. The prototype operates in a full peer-to-peer model, using the Wi-Fi 
communication channels available in Tablet PC and PDA. This means that every user 
has exactly the same application and seamlessly interacts with every other user running 
the application in the vicinity.  

Fig. 2. PDA prototype: a) SM creation; b) SD selection; c) SM composition 

 

The prototype was developed on top of a pen-based application framework developed 
at the University of Chile. Besides handling all communication and collaboration 
 issues,  this  framework  provides  a  very  rich  collection  of  predefined  pen-based 
gestures supporting the creation and manipulation of visual objects [32].  

Concerning the way users interact with the prototype, a new SM is defined by drawing 
half a rectangle (see Figure 2a). The user assigns the respective SD to each side of 
the rectangle (Figure 2b-c). Double-clicking a SM it will open the matrix and by doubleclicking 
 the  sides  of  the  matrix  affords  creating  rows  and  columns  (Figures  3a-c). 
Handwritten text is used to specify both SD and rows and columns headers, although 
there is also the possibility to select predefined ones from a menu. Finally, the correlations 
in the matrix are defined with double-clicking gestures (Figure 3d).  

When the size of the rectangle becomes larger, it may be navigated with left-right 
and  up-down  gestures.  There  are  also  available  zoom-in  and  zoom-out  gestures  to 
navigate within the rectangle.  

 

d 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 3. Managing the SM: a) b) column insertion; c) row insertion; d) specifying correlations 

106 

C. Sapateiro et al. 

Currently, the navigation between several SM must be accomplished by selecting 
the small rectangle at the top-left corner, which leads the user to a workspace displaying 
all available SM. Please note that although the SM are shared, the users individually 
interact with the workspace, i.e. there are no tightly coupling.  

A final note regarding the prototype, to refer that when a connection is not possible 
users may update their SM when in the proximity of other user and exchange SM between 
them by an Ir link. A compability mode is available to deal with the differences. 

5   Application Scenario 

When  facing  an  emergency  situation  two  main  behaviors  will  coexist:  rule-based 
behavior and knowledge-based behavior. Rule based behavior relies on existing contingency 
 plans  originated  from  simulations  and  training.  On  the  other  hand,  knowl-
edge-based behavior relies on contextual information, tacit knowledge and expertise 
to  address  contingencial  factors.  The  developed  approach  addresses  the  support  of 
team  collaboration  aiming  to  improve  actions  consistency  when  dealing  with  such 
unplanned factors. 

[33]  showed  that  several  emergency  scenarios  (e.g.,  fires,  floods)  share  common 
crisis  management  characteristics,  such  as:  teams  organization,  information  paths, 
cross  teams  communication  and  information  needs.  For  instance,  a  common  fire-
fighter’s organization is based on the Incident Commander (IC), as an organizer and 
decision-maker. Depending on the size of the situation, the operations are conducted 
in the field by several companies, each one constituted by a Captain and a small group 
of firefighters. 

The  major  requirements  to  collaboration  between  the  IC  and  the  Captains  were 

identified by [34]: 

•  Accountability: Accountability of resources and personnel. 
•  Assessment: Assessment of the situation through multiple sources. 
•  Awareness: Promoting a shared awareness of the situation. 
•  Communication:  Communication  support  should  add  reliability  and/or  redundancy 
to existing channels. 

Actually IC and Captains maintain situation awareness by communicating through 
radio and/or meeting face-to-face at regular intervals. However, this type of collaboration 
 lacks  information  persistency  [35].  With  the  proposed  approach  beside  the 
support of information persistency, by allowing involved actors to monitor and participate 
 in  a  shared  workspace,  the  system  will  also  provide  a  valuable  feedback 
mechanism of operational status. As the emergency situation unfolds, the situational 
dimensions  (involved  actors,  needed  resources,  proposed  actions,  etc.)  may  also 
evolve.  The  correlations  between  these  dimensions  will  be  continuously  updated, 
according  to  different  perspectives  coming  from  the  field.  This  perspective  is  supported 
in several interviews and ethnographic studies analysis, developed by us and a 
number of authors e.g. [35, 36].   

This  approach  can  be  extended  to  the  support  of  cross-organizational  collaborations,
 e.g., between Police, Civil Protection and Firefighters,  which often face communication 
barriers. For instance, the different forces in Portugal use non-compatible 

 

Supporting Unstructured Activities in Crisis Management 

107 

radio communications devices and sometimes the IC has to listen to three radios plus 
a cellular phone. The shared workspace affords bringing together scattered information.
 It is however expected that some training and discipline be necessary to develop 
social protocols and to devise the best ways to organize this information coming from 
several  people  in  the  field  as  also  presented  in  [3,  37].  The  prototype  purposefully 
does not control who is allowed to modify the SD and SM, thus allowing the level of 
flexibility envisaged by the notion of resilience.  

Next, we present a description of the proposed model and prototype usage by firefighters 
 in  an  emergency  situation.  Since  IC  usually  stays  at  a  safe  distance  of  the 
incident  (but  close  enough  to  be  aware)  he/she  could  be  equipped  with  a  tablet  PC 
(Figure 4) which due the dimension and interface may promote a better overall situation 
state awareness and application usability, and deliver to company captains PDAs 
which will assist them in the management of relevant awareness information to their 
context of action and also in their contributions to the solution strategy.  

Fig. 4. Managing the SM – Tablet PC: a) b) column insertion; c) row insertion 

 

5.1   Prototype Usage Description 

After an alarm is received, depending on the perceived scale of the accident, a predetermined 
number of emergency response resources are dispatched. On the way to the 
incident location teams receive by radio additional information regarding the type of 
incident  they  will  face  (e.g.  a  urban  fire),  such  as  weather  conditions,  existence  of 
victims, existence of dangerous materials in the neighborhood, …  

Once identified the type of incident a set of initial (pre-determined) SM can be selected 
containing typical dimensions necessary to address the kind of situation (in this 
example they could be for instance Situational Attributes versus Actions, Situational 
Attributes  versus  Actors  and  Actors  versus  Actions).  The  situational  attributes  presented 
above (weather conditions, existence of victims, existence of dangerous mate-
rials)  could  be  registered  in  a  Situation  Attributes  dimension  and  related  with  other 
dimensions such as Actions to take (e.g. to deal with the presence of dangerous mate-
rials), and/or involved Actors (e.g. with specific expertise for dealing with dangerous 
materials).  All  the  situation  dimensions,  could  initially  contain  typical  items,  for  
instance,  the  Actions  dimension  could  enumerate  typical  actions  under  the  type  of 
faced scenario: crowd control, traffic control, obtain fire hydrants locations, etc. Also 

108 

C. Sapateiro et al. 

recommended correlations (e.g. expert actor to specific action) could already exist in 
the SM cells. 

Usually the highest rank of the first team that arrives to incident location will assume 
the IC role. This team will make a quick in place size-up of the situation considering 
 an  initial  assessment  of:    hazards,  safety  procedures,  incident  scope,  etc.  and 
develop an attack plan. Again, regarding the situation assessment a set of SM can be 
selected (or created) to accommodate information gathered. If the situation demands, 
more  resources  are  requested  and  the  IC  role  may  be  passed  to  a  higher  rank  that 
arrives later on, providing a quick status report. Since information is persisted in a set 
of SM, they may help this role transition in a very important issue: perceive overall 
situation status. 

As situation evolves, a problematic concern for IC is to track resources allocation, 
“who  or  what  is  where  and doing  what?”   (accountability  and awareness  above presented 
requirements [34]). Usually, IC has a number of threads going on and information 
comes from multiple sources. To overcome this problem the set of SM: Resources 
versus Actors, Actors versus Locations, Resources versus Actions and Resources versus 
 Locations  could  be  used.  Figure  5  shows  SM  relating  resources  with  respective 
responsible actors, being operated in a PDA. 

 

Fig. 5. PDA Prototype 

A locations dimension may be important if an incident is large enough, because in 
such cases, companies will be organized into divisions which operate within a specific 
geographic region (e.g. north, third floor). Divisions may also be organized in groups 
which perform specific functions (e.g. rescue, medical care).  

Since, with this approach, a lot of incident’s related information is registered, the 
proposed prototype has an additional utility: it will allow a posteriori analysis of the 
course of action to promote further improvement in procedures, as well as new situation 
dimensions (and respective dimension items) and/or SMs to be initially available 
for future occurrences. 

 

Supporting Unstructured Activities in Crisis Management 

109 

6   Discussion and Future Work 

In this paper we describe a collaboration model and prototype aiming to support the 
unstructured  activities  that  emerge  in  emergency  scenarios  due  to  contingential  factors.
 The adoption of our prototype assumes that agents involved in these scenarios 
are professionals with expertise in emergency management and have specific training. 
In this way the information shared through the prototype will have a clear meaning to 
the involved actors. 

We should note that similar collaborative approaches exist and are already used in 
some  other  domains.  For  instance,  flight  operators  and  firefighters  adopted  several 
variations/generations of the Crew Resource Management (CRM) training, which has 
its  foundations concerning  not so  much the technical  knowledge and required skills 
but  rather  the  interpersonal  skills  used  for  gaining  and  maintaining  situation  awareness,
 solving problems and making decisions [38, 39]. The CRM approaches fosters a 
climate and a culture where the freedom to respectfully question authority is encouraged,
  aiming  to  increase  resilience  while  reducing  the  discrepancy  between  what  is 
happening and what should be happening.  

Keeping  the  IS  up  to  date  in  these  scenarios,  without  adding  unacceptable  overheads,
  presents  major  challenges  to  IS  developers.  For  instance,  status  reports  and 
situation assessments are hard to track due to dependencies on the explicit user interactions 
and information volatility.  

We have been studying a pulling strategy to IS support in this context: as information 
becomes old, the users may be prompted to report on their validity, in combination 
with a visualization schema to express the degradation of the quality of the available 
information.  For  now  we  are  considering  two  ways  to  implement  such  concept:  
1when 
users input information, a deadline is also introduced (e.g. valid for the next 
15  min);  2if 
 no  deadline  is  introduced  that  correlation  will  incrementally  became 
more  transparent  as  time  goes  by.  Once  we  refine  the  prototype,  a  field  evaluation 
should be made. The preliminary step of our evaluation methodology will be to conduct 
a workshop with domain experts and discuss the proposed approach in a scenario 
based evaluation. 

Acknowledgements 

The research supporting this work was partially financed by Portuguese FCT Project 
POSI/EIA/57038/2004 and Chile - Fondecyt Project Nr. 1085010.  

References 

1.  Sheth,  A.,  et  al.:  Workflow  and  process  automation  in  Information  Systems.  In:  NSF 

Workshop (1996) 

2.  Bernstein, A.: How can cooperative work tools support dynamic group processes? Bridging 
the specifity frontier. In: CSCW (2000) 

3.  ESSAY. Enhanced Safety through Situation Awareness Integration in training. European 

Community ESSAY project: Contract No GRD1-1999-10450 (2000) 

110 

C. Sapateiro et al. 

4.  Markus, M.L., Majchrzak, A., Gasser, L.: A design theory for systems that support emergent 
knowledge processes. MIS Quaterly (2002) 

5.  Cocchiara, R.: Beyond disaster recovery: becoming a resiliente business. IBM whitepaper 

(2007) 

6.  Sheffi, Y.: Building a resilient organization. MIT, Cambridge (2006) 
7.  Hollnagel, E., Woods, D.D.: Resilience Engineering Precepts. A. Publishing (2006) 
8.  Milis, K., Walle, B.V.d.: IT for Corporate Crisis Management: Findings from a Survey in 
6 different Industries on Management Attention, Intention and Actual Use. In: ISCRAM 
(2007) 

9.  Kanno, T., Futura, K.: Resilience of emergency response systems (2006) 
10.  Dourish,  P.,  et  al.:  Freeflow:  Mediating  between  representation  and  action  in  workflow 

systems. In: CSCW, USA (1996) 

11.  Mourão,  H.,  Antunes,  P.:  Supporting  effective  unexpected  exceptions  handling  in  workflow 
management systems. In: SAC, Seoul, korea (2007) 

12.  Suchman, L.: Plans and Situated Actions: The problem of human-machine communication. 

Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1987) 

13.  Gasson, S.: A social action model of situated information systems design. The Data Base 

for Advances in Information Systems 30(2) (1999) 

14.  Endsley,  M.:  Toward  a  theory  of  situation  awareness  in  dynamic  systems.  Human  Factors 
37(1), 32–64 (1995) 

15.  Storey,  M.-A.D.,  Cubranic,  D.,  German,  D.:  On  the  Use  of  Visualization  to  Support 
Awareness  of  Human  Activities  in  Software  Development:  A  Survey  and  a  Framework 
(2004) 

16.  Neale,  D.C.,  Carroll,  J.M.,  Rosson,  M.B.:  Evaluating  Computer-Supported  cooperative 

work: Models and frameworks. In: CSCW (2004) 

17.  Gutwin, C., Greenberg, S.: A descriptive framework of workspace awareness for real time 

groupware. In: CSCW (November 2002) 

18.  Bolstad, C.A., Endsley, M.R.: Shared displays and team performance. In: Human Performance,
 Situation Awareness and Automation (2000) 

19.  Shu,  Y.,  Futura,  K.:  An  inference  method  of  team  situation  awareness  based  on  mutual 

awareness. Cognition, Technology & Work 7, 272–287 (2005) 

20.  Garrety,  K.,  Robertson,  P.L.,  Badham,  R.:  Communities  of  Pratice,  actor  networks  and 
learning in development projects. In: The Future of Innovation Studies, 2001. ECIS, Netherlands 
(2001) 

21.  Donath, J.S.: Visual Who: Animating activities of an electronic community. ACM Multimedia,
 California (1995) 

22.  Erickson,  T.,  et  al.:  A  Social  Proxy  for  Distributed  Tasks:  Design  and  Evaluation  of  a 

Working Prototype. In: CHI 2004, Vienna, Austria (2004) 

23.  Thomas, J.J., Cook, K.A.: Illuminating the Path. NVAC (2004) 
24.  Dourish,  P.:  What  we  talk  about  when  we  talk  about  context.  Personal  and  Ubiquitous 

Computing (2004) 

25.  Borges,  M.R.S.,  et  al.:  Groupware  system  design  the  context  concept.  In:  Shen,  W.-m., 
Lin,  Z.,  Barthès,  J.-P.A.,  Li,  T.-Q.  (eds.)  CSCWD  2004.  LNCS,  vol. 3168,  pp.  45–54. 
Springer, Heidelberg (2005) 

26.  McManus, S., et al.: Resilience Management: A framework for Assessing and Improving 

the resilience of organizations (2007), http://www.resorgs.org.nz/ 

27.  Nonaka, I., Takeuchi, H.: The knowledge-creating company. Oxford University Press, Oxford 
(1995) 

28.  Weick, K.E.: Sense Making in Organizations. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks (1996) 

 

Supporting Unstructured Activities in Crisis Management 

111 

29.  Gasson, S.: A Framework For Behavioral Studies of Social Cognitio. In: Information Systems.
 ISOneWorld (2004) 

30.  Reason, J.T.: Managing the risks of organizational accidents. Ashgate, Aldershot (1997) 
31.  Miles,  M.B.,  Huberman,  A.M.:  Qualitative  data  analysis.  Sage  Publications,  Thousand 

Oaks (1994) 

32.  Zurita, G., et al.: Using PDAs in meetings: Patterns, Architecture and Components. Journal 
of Universal Computer Science 14(1) (2008) (Special Issue on Groupware: Issues and ap-
plications) 

33.  Berrouard, D., Cziner, K., Boukalov, A.: Emergency Scenario User Perspective in Public 

Safety Communication Systems. In: ISCRAM (2006) 

34.  Jiang,  X.,  et  al.:  Ubiquitous  computing  for  firefighters:  Field  studies  and  prototypes  of 

large displays for incident comand. In: CHI (2004) 

35.  Landgren, J.: Designing Information Technology for Emergency Response, Department of 

applied Information Technology. Goteborg University, Goteborg (2007) 

36.  Landgren, J.: Making action visible in time critical work. In: CHI Proceedings (2006) 
37.  Wybo, J.-L., Latiers, M.: Exploring complex emergency situations’ dynamic: theoretical, 
epistemological and methodological proposals. Int. J. Emergency Management 3(1), 40–51 
(2006) 

38.  Helmereich, R.L., Merrit, A.C., Wilhelm, J.A.: The evlution of Crew Resource managemnt 
Training in commercial Aviation. International Journal of Aviation Psychology 9(1), 19–
32 (1999) 

39.  Tippet, J.: Crew Resource Management Manual - A positive change for the  fire service. 

I.A.o.F. Chiefs. (2002), http://www.iafc.org/ 

