 

Supporting Collaborative Knowledge Creation in Mobile 

Working Scenarios 

Gustavo Zurita1 and Nelson Baloian2  

1 Information systems and Management Department, University de Chile, Diagonal Paraguay 

257, RM, Santiago de Chile, Chile 
gzurita@fen.uchile.cl  

2 Department of Computer Science, Universidad de Chile, Blanco Encalada 2010, 

RM, Santiago, Chile 

nbaloian@dcc.uchile.cl 

Abstract. Knowledge Creation (KC) is a critical activity inside organizations. It 
has been said to be a differentiating factor and an important source of competitiveness.
 Tacit knowledge is an important asset of any organization. Because it 
is not formalized is difficult to share. KC supporting systems help people inside 
an  organization  to  share  this  tacit  knowledge.  This  paper  presents  the  design, 
and  implementation  of  a  KC  system  called  MCKC,  for  Mobile  Collaborative 
Knowledge Creation, supporting face-to-face knowledge creation and sharing in 
mobile scenarios, allowing people to create new knowledge and share their tacit 
knowledge with their co-workers, using visual metaphors, gestures and sketches 
to implement the human-computer interface. 

Keywords: Knowledge Creation, Mobile, Face-to-face Collaboration. 

1   Introduction 

Explicit  knowledge  is  systematized  and  standardized  knowledge,  which  can  be  expressed 
 by  a  formal  language,  using  records,  reports,  or  files.  People  acquire  tacit 
knowledge through verbal face-to-face conversations, exchange of personal experiences 
or by processing previous knowledge they have, but they are not able to communicate it 
in a systematical way. This might be due to reasons, for example, because it is not structured 
 enough,  [1];  it  has  to  be  transferred  in  a  certain  social  context  in  order  to  be  
interpreted by the receiver, [2]; or it is difficult to represent. Nonaka and Takeuchi [3] 
proposed the Socialization, Externalization, Combination, Internalization (SECI) model 
in order to convert tacit knowledge into explicit knowledge trough a process they called 
Knowledge Creation (KC). It might be difficult to take advantage of tacit knowledge in 
order to achieve KC, since it is difficult retrieve and share it unless it is converted to 
explicit knowledge. This process has been conceptualized as a never-ending spiral [3]. 
Sometimes explicit knowledge fails to be shared because of  the presence of free-riding 
practices,  evaluation  apprehension,  production  blocking,  [1]  or  lack  of  trust  among 
people who create knowledge in the organization.   

Technologies used in KC include from successful databases storing best practices to artificial 
intelligence systems supporting human decision making processes. These solutions 

G. Kolfschoten, T. Herrmann, and S. Lukosch (Eds.): CRIWG 2010, LNCS 6257, pp. 16–24, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 

 

Supporting Collaborative Knowledge Creation in Mobile Working Scenarios 

17 

have been so far designed for static workplaces. This implies that mobile workers cannot 
be supported by the knowledge pool available in their organizations, nor can they contribute 
to enlarge the knowledge pool while performing their duties outside the office [1, 4].  

This  work  aims  to explore  the role of  mobile  technology as  support  for this  kind of 
meetings, providing simple but helpful visual mechanisms to support knowledge creation, 
especially targeted to manage tacit knowledge [1]. The prototype’s design takes into consideration 
 previous  works  including:  1)  The  SECI  knowledge  transformation  model  to 
developed a platform which supports the knowledge creation [5]; 2) Results of researchers 
about the loss of productivity in the generation of ideas (free-riding, production blocking, 
and evaluation apprehension), and the relevance of face-to-face social interactions, [6].  

2   Knowledge Creation in a Face-to-Face Scenarios 

2.1   Visual Mechanisms, Sketching and Brain-Sketching  

According to [7], visualization enables knowledge “mapping” facilitating its creation and 
sharing. In KC, visualization is used to support the creation of tacit knowledge individually 
 or  collaboratively  by  means  of  sketches,  concept  maps,  graphical  representations, 
etc. It facilitates the clarification of the tacit knowledge for an individual herself or when 
trying to share her knowledge with others.  

Previous works on the field [8] highlight the following advantages of sketching in idea 
face-to-face  generation  meetings:  a)  in  relation  to  thinking,  sketching  stimulates  a  reinterpretative 
cycle in the individual participant’s idea generation process, b) in relation to 
the talking, sketching stimulates the participants to re-interpret each other’s ideas; and c) in 
relation to the storing, sketching stimulates the use of earlier ideas in the idea generation 
process by enhancing their accessibility. The visualization technique called ‘brainsketch-
ing’ [8] was used to describe idea generation techniques that use sketching. Brainsketching 
is a graphic variation of the more widely known brainwriting technique. Commonly during 
brainsketching, participants first sketch ideas individually and share them by switch 
papers. Then they use the ideas already present on the worksheet as a source of inspiration.  

2.2   Brainwriting-Based Knowledge Creation in Mobile Groups  

According to [9], most people believe that knowledge creation is best performed in a 
face-to-face groups because interaction with other people stimulates creativity. However,
 controlled research has consistently shown that people produce fewer and lower 
quality ideas working in a group as compared with when working alone or in nominal 
groups. Nowadays, much has become clear about the causes hindering productivity in 
face-to-face brainstorming groups: a) free riding is the tendency to let to others group 
members  do  the  work;  b)  evaluation  apprehension  is  when  groups  start  out  with  a 
low rate of production which are maintained in the rest of the session; c) production 
blocking refers to the fact that group members have to wait to express their ideas because 
they have to wait for their turns to talk.  

In accordance to [9], electronic brainwriting and brainsketching can be used to reduce 
 or  even  eliminate  production  blocking,  evaluation  apprehension,  and  also  free 
riding. Moreover, the findings of [9, 10] indicate that sharing written ideas in groups 
may enhance creativity. In [9] authors propose an initial phase of individual writing of 

 

18 

G. Zurita and N. Baloian 

ideas. These ideas are then shared with the group in a round-robin turn-taking session 
where they are summarized and selected using a blackboard. Then the group discusses 
the ideas for clarification and evaluation. Finally, they rank the ideas in an individual 
and/or collaborative process in order to take a final decision. 

Nonaka et. al. [3] developed a model of KC that involves a continuous interaction 
between  tacit  and  explicit  knowledge  in  order  to  produce  new  knowledge  within 
groups or communities. It has therefore been argued that tacit or implicit knowledge 
can be converted to explicit knowledge by “reflection in action”, by the use of metaphors 
and analogies or by using mentoring and storytelling. Although it is possible to 
“externalize” some parts of implicit knowledge, some aspects of tacit knowledge, particularly 
 those  related  to creativity,  intuition, emotions,  and  skills,  are  unlikely  to be 
ever made completely explicit. 

Becerra-Fernandez  and  Cousins  [11],  say  knowledge  is  increasingly  being  created 
and applied on the move workers working face-to-face. The potential of KC is usually 
limited to static workplaces because most KC support systems are designed for being 
used in desktop PCs connected to a central server. This might exclude valuable mobile 
workers  in  charge  of  knowledge  intensive  activities.  An  organization’s  capabilities  to 
support KC may be extended through the introduction of mobile technology usage. 

The  authors  in  [11]  argue  that  mobile  KC  supporting  situated  work  has  not  attracted 
 as  much  attention  as  it  should,  considering  its  potential.  There  are  mobile 
systems developed with the aim of extending the information access everywhere and 
anytime by using PDAs .  

2.3   Design Principles Applied to a Face-to-Face Mobile KC Support   

In  [12]  authors  conclude  that  rather  than  focusing  on  systems  to  codify  knowledge,  we 
should instead concentrate on systems facilitating collaboration between knowledge holders, 
creators  and  those  needing  the  knowledge.  Indeed,  recent  research  has  already  begun  to 
recognize the need to incorporate support for face-to-face KC and sharing when designing 
KM systems in order to facilitate the transfer of complex, context-specific knowledge [6]. 

In  accordance  to  [13],  there  are  three  key  functional  requirements  for  KC  systems:  
1)  facilitate  information  contextualization,  2)  facilitate  social  interactions  and 
networking, and 3) present a ease to use human-computer interface - providing 
visual representation and organization of information.  

Considering the arguments and ideas mentioned before, we develop a prototype of 
a  system  supporting  KC  in  mobile  scenarios  with  people  collaboratively  working 
face-to-face, which we will refer to as MCKC, for Mobile Collaborative Knowledge 
Creation. Its design principles are derived from the results of various previous empirical 
 and  experimental  KC  research  works.  They  also  consider  the  characteristics  of 
mobile devices and human-computer interface design principles.  

MCKC runs on Tablet-PCs and PDAs wirelessly interconnected by an ad-hoc network,
 with the possibility of synchronizing the data of the mobile devices with a central 
 repository  when  the  required  networking  infrastructure  is  available.  In  this  way, 
people  have  access  to  the  existing  explicit  knowledge  anytime  and  anywhere.  The 
touch-screen mechanism of their displays is used as the main human-computer interaction 
 mean  to input  information  to  the  system.  As  we  mentioned  before,  sketching  is 
used as a visual tool for information management and for supporting brainwriting and 
brainsketching processes. It is also used to implement command inputs by gestures, in 

 

 

Supporting Collaborative Knowledge Creation in Mobile Working Scenarios 

19 

order to implement a simple and easy-to-use application interface. By using sketching, 
the system implements the electronic paper and pencil paradigm, which facilitate the 
communication of tacit knowledge.    

The  system  uses  various  visualization  mechanisms  for  information  management. 
MCKC  implements  the  free-hand-based  input  paradigm  which  means  user  are  able  to 
draw sketches, edit graphic information and free-hand text writing, as well as using visual 
metaphors for information management like conceptual maps, the usage of gestures 
to trigger options, object dragging, visual presentation of the concept maps’ nodes, etc.  

The  system’s  design  is  oriented  to  support  collaborative  KC  based  on  the  SECI 
model. The system has three modes: 1) brainwriting/brainsketching, or knowledge 
externalization support mode, 2) selection of relevant information, or socialization 
and combination support mode, 3) visual presentation and knowledge semantics of 
the  created  knowledge  mode,  which  supports  the  socialization  process.  The  three 
modes  of  the  application  are  aimed  to  provide  the  environment  supporting  tacit  to 
tacit knowledge sharing and creation, without the need to convert tacit knowledge to 
explicit knowledge before sharing it.  

MCKC considers social interaction as a key factor for collaborative KC, although 
it can be also used to support individual KC, in this way we expect to reduce the productivity 
problem described before. Writing ideas instead of speaking them inside a 
group minimizes the problem of production blocking since individuals do not have 
to wait their turn to generate ideas. It may also reduce evaluation apprehension since 
the  written  format  eliminates  the  need  for  public  speaking  and  is  typically  more 
anonymous than oral brainstorming. Also the free-riding problem might be reduced 
because it will be easier to identify not contributing people. Employees should not be 
forced to use a knowledge creation or sharing system. The system must be created to 
support their work and their social behavior, [1]. The system has to adapt to employ-
ees’ social interactions in order to let them be a member of a successful KC community 
 and  gain  recognition.  The  relevant  information  selection  mode  of  MCKC  allows  a 
person to explain the semantic associated to the knowledge that has been made explicit in 
order to build a common language. 

3   MCKC Description and Scenario of Application  

As already establish, sketches help to externalize the tacit knowledge and hence express 
ideas and concepts from people’s minds. They can also help people to order and clarify 
their own ideas before communicating them to others [8]. This is why MCKC allows 
specifying  the  explicit  and  tacit  knowledge  by  means  of  its  interface.  This  interface 
allows the manipulation of information in a simple way using the device’s stick to activate 
options using gestures. It uses visual mechanisms for presenting and manipulating 
information.  It  allows  the  edition  of  sketches  and  freehand  writing  and  facilitates  the 
interaction  among  members  of  a  group  working  face-to-face  collaboratively  in  KC. 
MCKC can be used anytime, anywhere which means it can be brought to any physical 
place of the organization, and can be even used while people are on the move. In this 
section we describe briefly the functionalities of MCKC, its three working modes and 
the characteristics that make it a suitable tool for supporting KC. Each mode is oriented 
to support one stage of the SECI model. The system does not impose a certain order of 

 

20 

G. Zurita and N. Baloian 

sequence for using each mode which allows a spiral kind of development. It is always 
possible to go back to a previous mode in order to make corrections or even start from 
scratches again. The following description of the tool is based on a scenario where three 
persons  of  the  marketing  department  of  an  organization  are  trying  to  figure  out  how 
does the new poster advertising an all-terrain car should look like.  

a

b

c

d

e

 

Fig. 1. Specification of an idea through sketching and freehand writing. a) An idea of a wheel 
and the text “bags” is generated. b) A  gesture of  writing a horizontal line through the whole 
screen will mark the separation between two ideas. c) The second idea is produced (a car sketch 
the “speed” text). d) An idea is being selected and then the “enter” icon is clicked. e) The idea 
is being edited, which will be seen updated when the user leaves the editing mode.  

3.1   SECI Model - Externalization: Mode Brain-Writing/Sketching 

The brainwriting/brainsketching mode supports the knowledge externalization allowing 
users to explain their tacit or explicit knowledge by jeans of freehand writing or 
sketching. This mode works in a non-collaborative way by default, allowing users to 
freely  prepare  their  ideas  before  sharing  them,  reducing  the  free-riding,  production 
blocking, and evaluation apprehension problems. Users generate their ideas in parallel 
despite they are in a face-to-face situation (see Fig. 1).  

If a previous idea has to be edited, the user selects the area where it is by a single 

click and “enters” the edition mode clicking the “arrow down” icon (see Fig. 1d.). 

a

b

c

d

e

f

Fig. 2. List of ideas to be selected. a). Scrolling the ideas by moving the pen on the right of the 
screen; b). An idea is ranked from the level 1 to the level 2; c. An idea is ranked to the level 0 
(irrelevant level). d). An idea select, drag and drop on the visual representation; e). All ideas of 
level 1 were use on the KC representation, and this set disappears; f). Final result. 

 

 

 

Supporting Collaborative Knowledge Creation in Mobile Working Scenarios 

21 

In order to work collaboratively, participants have to activate the collaborative work 
option of the application. After this, they can share their ideas and start editing them 
collaboratively  in  the  same  way  they  did  individually.  This  supports  the  knowledge 
socialization process of the SECI model. Since ideas are shown one below the other a 
scrolling function is necessary to go through them, which is done by a gesture of sliding 
the stick up and down parallel to the right vertical border of the screen (Fig. 1c.). 

3.2   SECI Model-Socialization/Combination: Relevant Information Selection 

Mode 

After each user has externalized her ideas, it is necessary to refine them involving all 
group members.  In order to select the ideas it is necessary to define which are relevant 
and which can be discarded. In order to support this process, MCKC generates a 
list of all created ideas, which will be visually shown as rectangular boxes of similar 
proportions.  In  this  stage,  the  list  of  ideas  is  visible  to  all  participants,  as  shown  in 
Figure 1. In order to rank them, participants have to vote for them positively or negatively.
 They can issue a positive vote for a certain idea by making a tick gesture on 
the left area of the rectangle representing it (see Fig. 1.e.). A negative vote is issued 
by making a tick on the right area of the rectangle (see Fig. 1.f.). Numbers from 1 to 5 
represent the ranking of each idea according to the votes received, being 5 the most 
relevant. A 0 means the idea is not relevant at all. Because there might be many ideas, 
a scroll mechanism is also available in this mode (Fig. 1.d.). 

At the beginning, before receiving any vote, the ranking number for an idea will be 
1. The ranking number for an idea appears in the bottom-right corner of the rectangle. 
As  ideas  get  ranked,  they  will  be  rearranged  and  grouped  according  to  the  ranking 
level.  In  this  way,  relevant  ideas  are  easily  differentiated  from  the  irrelevant  ones, 
supporting their selection. An idea can be collaboratively edited while working in this 
mode by clicking in the middle area of the rectangle. Collaborative editing allows the 
socialization  of  the  tacit  and  explicit  knowledge,  allowing  participants  to  combine 
their knowledge and perspectives about the ideas. 

3.3   SECI Model - Internalization: Visual Presentation and Semantic of the KC 

Mode  

This mode allows users to concretize the KC process using a final visual representation 
 of  the  ideas.  This  process  is  done  collaboratively  with  the  agreement  of  all  
participants.  For  the  example  case,  participants  have  to  agree  which  ideas  will  be 
expressed visually and which in a written form on the poster.  

At  the  beginning  of  this  mode,  an  empty  page  will  appear  with  a  list  of  small 
squares at the top representing the ideas generated ordered according to their ranking. 
In this stage, participants have to make a visual arrangement of the ideas. This is an 
important stage during the KC because it is expected that the tacit and explicit knowledge 
to be expressed here with sketches and other visual representations. It is expected 
that participants will first draw a sketch where ideas will be placed in a particular order 
according to the meaning of the sketch. In the example, users will determine the position 
where each idea will be placed in the poster. Ideas can be dragged from the list 
and dropped in the desired place (Fig. 2.). The placement of the ideas inside the sketch 

 

22 

G. Zurita and N. Baloian 

should  represent  a  meaning  collaboratively  defined  by  all  participants.  The  square 
representing an idea can be reshaped as desired (see Fig. 2.d.). After placing the ideas 
on the schema, participants may finalize their proposal by skating which one would be 
fundamental to the project or they can go back to a previous mode in order to edit, the 
existing ideas or include new ones. Not used ideas might be deleted.   

4   Usability and Utility Evaluation 

For the usability and utility evaluation processes we used two external consulters, two 
car sellers of a certain brand and two drivers (users). We proposed them the task of 
creating  a  commercial  spot  for  a  car.  They  had  six  working  sessions  during  two 
weeks, during which they used MCKC in order to collaboratively work in a face-toface 
modality to generate the ideas for the commercial spot. This work was monitored 
with  inspection  techniques  to  bring  more  context  to  the  inspection  task.  Then  we 
conducted  a  workshop  where  all  participants  had  to  analyze  the  MCKC  tool  in  the 
context  of  the  predefined  scenario.  From  the  workshop  we  finally  obtained  a  set  of 
comments  and  observations  regarding  the  usability  and  utility  of  MCKC  tool.  The 
workshop revealed that the free-riding, production blocking, and evaluation apprehension 
 problems  were  partially  mitigated  by  the  use  of  technological  support,  which 
contrasted  with  the  results  of  previous  experiences  where  technology  was  not  used. 
The explicit knowledge could be easily specified and communicated with the help of 
MCKC.  It  was  also  noted  that  that  sketches  helped  to  exteriorize  and  share  tacit 
knowledge.  The  visualization  of  the  artifacts  on  the  system  interface  associated  to 
data, information and functionalities triggered by gestures was well accepted and easy 
to  use.  However,  more  experimented  user  missed  the  menus,  choice  boxes  and  fast 
access keys. The “visual presentation and semantic of the created knowledge” mode, 
was by far perceived as the most helpful one because it’s flexible and enriched way to 
represent  knowledge  as  a  final  result  of  a  goal.  Second  to  this,  the  “brain-
writing/sketching” mode, was also perceived as a very helpful way to easily specify 
ideas through sketches and the possibility to organize them as concept maps. In the 
whole MCKC was perceived as a relevant tool to support collaborative work because 
it enables people to contribute, explain, exteriorize and share their ideas. Regarding 
the  usability  of  the  MCKC,  in  general  the  participants  suggested  some  additional 
improvements.  The  participants  regarded  a  major  challenge  to  keep  the  awareness 
information  and  collaboration  constantly  up-to-date.  The  learning  curve  of  MCKC 
was satisfactory completed during the second working session. Some difficulties were 
perceived on users who declared not having too much experience with technology. 

5   Conclusions 

People posses a big amount of tacit “hidden” knowledge which has to be converted into 
“new knowledge", in order to promote its delivery, sharing and innovation. In this way, 
this knowledge can be effectively used in the organizations where people work. MCKC 
is a tool that helps externalize this knowledge. Our work is based on the empirical and 
experimental  findings  of  KC  related  Works,  which  have  been  incorporated  into  the 
system presented in this paper. The visualization technology of knowledge and the use 

 

 

Supporting Collaborative Knowledge Creation in Mobile Working Scenarios 

23 

of mobile devices as support for KM is a new field, which has already generated applications 
for different scenarios such as engineering, education and economy.  

Our application supports the  visualization of information in a free and extensible 
way. It also promotes the collaboration in mobile scenarios by making use of ad-hoc 
wireless networks, which helps to transform tacit into explicit knowledge, promoting 
the  elicitation,  transmission  and  sharing  of  information  based  on  sketches.  The  KM 
success  model  developed  by  emphasizes  the  need  for  KM  systems  to  include  both 
types of knowledge (tacit and explicit) and linkages or pointers to people with knowledge 
 expertise.  A  better  understanding  of  the  various  characteristics  of  the  tacit 
knowledge  dimension,  as  detailed  in  the  present  study,  will  assist  researchers  and 
practitioners in the development of  more sophisticated knowledge  management systems 
that can adequately address knowledge users’ needs for both codified knowledge 
and interaction with human sources of knowledge. 

Acknowledgements 

The work of this paper was funded by Fondecyt project 1085010 and Latin American 
Collaborative Research Federation (LACCIR), project number R1209LAC002. 

References 

1.  Matuszewski, M., Balandin, S.: Peer-to-Peer Knowledge Sharing in the Mobile Environment.
  In:  The  Fifth  International  Conference  on  Creating,  Connecting  and  Collaborating 
through Computing, C5 2007 (2007) 

2.  Wiberg, M.: Knowledge Management in Mobile CSCW: Evaluation Results of a Mobile 
Physical/Virtual Meeting Support System. In: Proceedings of the 34th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’34). IEEE, Maui (2001) 

3.  Nonaka,  I.,  Takeuchi,  H.:  The  Knowledge  Creating  Company.  Oxford  University  Press, 

New York (1995) 

4.  Becerra-Fernandez, I., Cousins, K.: Nomadic context-aware knowledge management sys-
tems:  applications,  challenges  and  research  problems.  International  Journal  of  Mobile 
Learning and Organisation 1(2), 103–121 (2007) 

5.  Nonaka, I., von Krogh, G., Voelpel, S.: Organizational Knowledge Creation Theory: Evolutionary 
Paths and Future. Advances, in Organization Studies (01708406), pp. 1179–1208 
(2006) 

6.  Brown, S.A., Dennis, A.R., Gant, D.B.: Understanding the Factors Influencing the Value 
of Person-to-Person Knowledge Sharing. In: Proceedings of the 39th Annual Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences, HICSS 2006 (2006) 

7.  Yongjin, Z., et al.: Study on the Knowledge Visualization and Creation Supported Kmap 
Platform.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  First  International  Workshop  on  Knowledge  Discovery 
and Data Mining. IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos (2008) 

8.  van  der  Lugt,  R.:  How  sketching  can  affect  the  idea  generation process  in  design  group 

meetings. Design Studies 26, 101–122 (2005) 

9.  Paulus, P.B.,  Huei-Chuan,  Y.:  Idea  Generation  in  Groups:  A  Basis  for  Creativity  in  Organizations.
 Organizational Behavior & Human Decision Processes 82, 76–87 (2000) 

 

24 

G. Zurita and N. Baloian 

10.  Herring, S.R., Jones, B.R., Bailey, B.P.: Idea Generation Techniques among Creative Professionals.
 In: Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, pp. 1–10 (2009) 

11.  Becerra-Fernandez, I., Cousins, K.: Nomadic context-aware knowledge management sys-
tems:  applications,  challenges  and  research  problems.  International  Journal  of  Mobile 
Learning and Organisation 1(2), 103–121 (2007) 

12.  Malhotra, A., et al.: Radical Innovation without Collocation: A Case Study at Boeing. MIS 

Quarterly 25, 229–249 (2001) 

13.  Balmisse, G., Meingan, D., Passerini, K.: Technology Trends in Knowledge Management 

Tools. International Journal of Knowledge Management 3(2), 118–131 (2007) 

 

