A Model for Designing Geocollaborative Artifacts and 

Applications 

Pedro Antunes1, Gustavo Zurita2, and Nelson Baloian3 

Department of Informatics of the Faculty of Sciences, Campo Grande, Lisbon, Portugal 

1 University of Lisbon,  

paa@di.fc.ul.pt 
2 Universidad de Chile,  

Department of Information System and Management of the Economy and Businesses  

School, Diagonal Paraguay 257, Santiago de Chile, Chile 

gzurita@ing.puc.cl 

3 Universidad de Chile,  

Department of Computer Science of the Engineering School, Blanco Encalada 2120,  

Santiago de Chile, Chile 
nbaloian@gmail.com 

Abstract.  There  are  many  human  activities  for  which  information  about  the 
geographical location where they take place is of paramount importance. In the 
last  years  there  has  been  increasing  interest  in  the  combination  of  Computer 
Supported Collaborative Work (CSCW) and geographical information. In this 
paper we analyze the  concepts and elements of CSCW that  are  most relevant  
to  geocollaboration.  We  define  a  model  facilitating  the  design  of  shared  
artifacts capable to build shared awareness of the geographical context. The paper 
also describes two case studies using the model to design geocollaborative 
applications.  

Keywords: Geocollaboration, sensemaking, collaborative capacity. 

1   Introduction 

Since thousands of years mankind has used maps printed in stone, textile, papyrus and 
paper to support various tasks involving navigation. Nowadays, we use a great variety 
of electronic devices like  handhelds and Tablet-PCs to accomplish the  same purpose. 
Smartboards and other interactive large multi-touch displays allow virtual navigation on 
3D maps. And people locate physical landmarks using mobile devices and GPSs. Furthermore,
 the widespread availability of mobile and wireless technology, combined with 
advances  made  in  human-computer  interaction,  user-interfaces  and  visualization,  turn 
possible the computer support to multifaceted activities requiring geospatial information 
and collaboration, also known as geocollaboration.  

According to [1-3], geocollaboration is a complex computer supported collaborative 
working situation where people execute diverse tasks using geospacial information.
 These tasks may involve exploring [2] and/or interpreting geographically-related 
data  [4],  mapping  data  into  meaningful  representations  [5],  and  taking  geospacial 

L. Carriço, N. Baloian, and B. Fonseca (Eds.): CRIWG 2009, LNCS 5784, pp. 278–294, 2009. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009 

 

A Model for Designing Geocollaborative Artifacts and Applications 

279 

decisions in various kinds of situations, like crisis management [6, 7], building planning,
  knowledge  creation  and  management  [8,  9],  and  strategy  making  [10].  Thus 
geocolaboration may be defined as the study of collaborative tasks where the information 
 concerning  location  plays  a  fundamental  role,  as  well  as  the  development  of 
methods, tools and frameworks facilitating these activities.  

A central issue in geocolaboration concerns modeling the collaborative tasks performed 
by a group of people and involving geospacial information. This activity requires 
 conceptualizing  work  scenarios  around  different  modalities  of  time,  place, 
space and context.  

There  have  been  some  conceptual  framework  proposals  addressing  some  of  the 
mentioned modalities in specific application scenarios like crisis management, policy 
creation  on-the-field,  urban  planning  [3],  military  strategy,  and  mining  exploration 
[1]. The role of these frameworks is to facilitate the application design according to a 
comprehensive set of technological, social and cognitive requirements. In this paper 
we organize all these elements in a generic framework which main purpose is also to 
facilitate application design and development.  

2   CSCW Concepts Used in Geocolaboration 

The  notion  of  place  has  been  considered  fundamental  to  understand  CSCW.  The 
time/place map proposed by Johansen et al [11] has been one of the most prevalent 
CSCW taxonomies in the research literature (see, e.g. [12]). The distinction between 
same-place and different-place has a  focus on accessibility rather than geographical 
nature,  determining  the  overall  architecture  and  functionality  of  the  system.  In  particular,
  the  time/place  map  is  based  upon  the  discussion  of  DeSanctis  and  Gallupe 
[13] about the different support to remote and local groups.  

Some subsequent developments of the time/place  map continue to emphasize the 
accessibility constraints. For instance, the expansion of the place dimension in three 
categories – co-located, virtual co-located and remote –, addresses the infrastructure 
capabilities to access each other in a team [14-16]. 

Going  beyond  the  accessibility  constraints  imposed  by  the  technology,  place  has 
also been regarded by social theorists as a fundamental constraint to communication. 
Studies of media richness [17] and media naturalness [18] show that communication 
mediated  by  technology  looses  several  important  features  such  as  nonverbal  cues, 
rapid feedback and arousal. In this line of reasoning, the notion of place is fundamental 
 to  adapt  the  medium  to  the  group  and  task,  and  conversely  adapt  the  group  and 
task to the medium.  

The conceptual change from place to space introduces a more broad concern with 
geographical relationships such as location, distance and orientation [19, 20]. Places 
exist  in  spaces  [20,  21].  Dix  et  al  [19]  proposed  a  taxonomy  of  space  considering 
physical and virtual places, and Cartesian and topological locations.  

Rodden  [22]  analyzed  the  relationships  between  context,  places  and  spaces.  He 
proposed  a  conceptual  model  of  virtual  spaces  using  focus  and  nimbus.  Focus  and 
nimbus are subspaces that, respectively, map the attention and presence of elements in 
spaces. Also related with context, we find the distinction between private and public 
spaces, the former pertaining to things and actions belonging to one single individual 
and the later shared among a group [8, 23].  

280 

P. Antunes, G. Zurita, and N. Baloian 

The notion of virtual space is fundamental in Collaborative Virtual Environments 
[24].  Virtual  spaces  are  interactive,  shared,  malleable,  populated  and  may  be  navigated.
 According to MacEachren and Brewer [12], interaction involves the aggregation 
 of  participants,  topology  of  connections  and  dissemination  of  information.  The 
navigation is not necessarily spatial but may also be logical. For instance, the roomsmetaphor 
defines navigation in virtual spaces like discussion forums [25] that are not 
spatially organized but rather organized according to the associated set of activities. 
Virtual spaces may assume complex structures, such as clusters, stacks, lists, tables, 
rooms, etc. [26]. Users should then be able to navigate these structures. Collaborative 
visualization, as an enabler of interaction and collaboration, is naturally another major 
challenge to consider in virtual spaces [8, 27]. Collaborative visualization involves at 
least data exchange, shared control and dynamic interaction [12].  

Concerning the relationship between physical space and navigation, we also find in 
the  literature  the  distinction  between  wandering,  visiting  and  traveling  [28].  In  the 
same  line  of  reasoning,  Dix  et  al  [19]  proposed  different  levels  of  mobility:  fixed, 
mobile,  autonomous,  free,  embedded  and  pervasive.  Cheverst  et  al  [29]  studied  the 
relationships  between  mobility,  location  awareness  and  location  services  to  derive 
important  requirements  such  as  flexibility,  visibility  and  context-sensitivity.  Davis 
[30] analyzed the challenges posed by the relationship between mobility and information 
 access,  including  the  removal  of  time/space  constraints  to  communication  and 
knowledge work, improved access to decision makers and increased ability to receive 
and process information.  

We should also analyze the notion of workspace. According to Snowdon et al [24], 
a  place  has  inherent  a  set  of  activities  that  occur  there,  while  a  workspace  is  just  a 
container  of  places  with  ongoing  activities.  We  may  distinguish  two  categories  of 
workspaces: structured and georeferenced workspaces. 

The  structured  workspace  organizes  (logically  or  physically)  several  activities  in 
coherent sets, which are nevertheless independent from the place itself. A group editor 
is a good example of this type of workspace, since the workspace serves to organize 
different activities, like writing and revising, while maintaining a coherent view of 
the whole [31].  

Liechti [32] studied the relationship between context and workspace, defining peripheral 
awareness as the understanding of the activities being carried out by others 
nearby one’s place. Peripheral awareness is naturally related with the notions of focus 
and  nimbus,  but  also  with  notification  and  attention.  Gutwin  and  Greenberg  [33] 
expanded this view to account for the whole space, defining workspace awareness as 
the understanding of another person interactions in a shared workspace using a basic 
set of questions: who, what, where, when, and how.  

A  georeferenced  workspace  organizes  activities  dependent  on  the  geographical 
place  where  they  are  carried  out.  We  find  in  the  literature  innumerous  examples  of 
georeferenced  workspaces.  For  instance,  Collaborative  Spatial  Decision-Making 
(CSDM) tools and Spatial Decision Support Systems (SDSS) fundamentally rely on 
geographical  places  to  support  decision-making  [12,  34,  35].  Less  attached  to  the 
physical  property  of  workspaces,  we  find  synthetic  collaborative  environments  for 
geo-visualization [26, 36, 37]. And  we also  find proposals combining physical  with 
virtual georeferenced workspaces, like the Geo-Spatial Hypermedia system proposed 
by Grønbæk et al [26].  

 

A Model for Designing Geocollaborative Artifacts and Applications 

281 

Table 1. Major geocollaboration concerns 

Space 

Place 

Accessibility 

Mediation 

Geographical  
relationships 

Awareness 

 

Physical space 

Mobility 

Virtual space 

Context 

Same-place, different-place 
Co-located, virtually co-located remote 
Nonverbal cues, rapid feedback, arousal 

Cartesian, topological 

Location 
Distance 
Orientation 
Location awareness 

Wandering, visiting, traveling 
Fixed, mobile, autonomous, free, embedded, 
pervasive 
Flexibility, visibility, context-sensitivity 
Information access 
Focus, nimbus 
Private, public 

Aggregation, topology, dissemination 
Spatial, logical 
Data exchange, shared control, dynamic interaction 

Clusters, stacks, lists, tables 
Individual, collective, coordinated, concerted, 
negotiated 
Who, what, where, when, how 

Focus, nimbus, notification, attention 

Interaction 
Navigation 
Collaborative 
visualization 
Structure 
Collaborative 
capacity 
Workspace 
awareness 
Peripheral 
awareness 

Workspace 

 

Structured 
workspace 

Georeferenced 
workspace 
Social space 

Geographical 
relationships 
Social  
awareness 
Sensemaking 
Embodied interaction 

Location 

Geographical places, synthetic 
places, combined places 

Cultural meaning, history 

Perception, interpretation and anticipation 

 

Antunes et al [2] proposed adopting the notion of collaborative capacity to characterize 
 geocollaboration.  Collaborative  capacity  is  a  measure  of  the  organizational 
ability to respond to problems and challenges. The  theory  was developed by Nunamaker 
 et  al  [38]  and  has  been  tested  by  other  researchers  [39-41].  It  identifies  four 
levels of increasing ability for successful collaboration, ranging from the individual, 
collective and coordinated to the concerted level. The theory is that organizations will 
increase their potential to create value by increasing their collaboration levels. To the 
four  categories  we  add  one  more  extending  the  collaborative  capacity  beyond  the 
concerted level: the negotiated level. The reason to propose this additional level is the 
observation  that  the  capacity  to  negotiate  conflicting  views  in  concerted  work  increases 
the quality of the outcomes [42].  

Dourish  [21]  and  Brewer  and  Dourish  [43]  make  the  distinction  between  spatial 
(structured or georeferenced) and social workspaces, the former more focused on the 
physical context and the later more adequate to understand broader issues related to 

282 

P. Antunes, G. Zurita, and N. Baloian 

social practice beyond the physical reality. In this context, social workplaces combine 
physical  affordances  with  social  interaction,  cultural  meaning,  experience  and  
knowledge.  

Weick [44] developed the notion of sensemaking to better understand what occurs 
in social spaces. Sensemaking is an ongoing process aiming to create order and make 
retrospective sense of what occurs through the articulation of several cognitive functions 
like perception, interpretation and anticipation [44]. It has also been associated 
to collaboration [45] and preliminary decision-making activities like  “understanding 
the situation” or “getting the picture” [46].  

Sensemaking is a cognitive function necessary to build awareness of the different 
elements occurring in the workplace: the team members, their activities and the available 
physical and virtual artifacts. Sensemaking also serves to build awareness of the 
relationships  between  workplaces  within  workspaces,  including  geographical  relationships 
and mobility. And finally, sensemaking also contributes to build awareness 
of the relationships between action and environmental response [47].  

Dourish [48] proposed the notion of embodied interaction to account for the embedded 
 relationships  between  social  and  spatial  spaces.  These  relationships  seem 
quite  common  in  our  everyday  experience.  Dourish  exemplifies  with  metaphorical 
expressions like “his position is indefensible” [48], revealing how embedded spatial 
concepts are in our communication.  

From the discussion above we realize that geocollaboration results from a complex 
interaction  between  various  concepts.  Firstly,  we  shall  consider  the  relationships 
between  place  and  space,  physical  and  virtual,  spatial  and  social,  place  and  work. 
Secondly,  context  and  awareness  seem  fundamental  to  characterize  what  may  be 
occurring in spaces, weather physical or virtual. And finally, both mobility and navigation,
 the former more related with physical spaces and the later more associated to 
virtual spaces, are also fundamental factors to ponder when analyzing geocollaboration.
 In Table 1 summarizes the above discussion.  

3   Related Work 

Table 2 summarizes the description of what we regard as the most relevant works in 
the field of geocolaboration published in the last two years.  Most of these works are 
aimed to support crisis management. Some of them correspond to case studies (noted 
as T in Table 2) [7], while others propose applications or prototypes (noted as A/P) 
including  various  geocollaboration  characteristics  like  geographical  relationships, 
awareness, mediation and accessibility.  

In the table, the R column shows the work’s reference number. M/F indicates the 
field,  defined  as  Knowledge  Construction  (KC),  Decision  Making  (DM)  and  Crisis 
Management (CM). An asterisk in the A/P column indicates the work corresponds to 
an application or prototype, while an asterisk in the T column indicates it is an ethnographical 
study or case analysis identifying  application requirements. An asterisk in 
the MD column indicates the work is about mobile devices. The I column indicates 
the study deals with interaction. N means the study deals with navigation and V with 
visualization. Regarding geographic issues,  SP indicates users are in the same place 
and DF in different places. D means the distance between two points is calculated at 

 

A Model for Designing Geocollaborative Artifacts and Applications 

283 

some stage of the work. An asterisk in column O means the work deals with orientation 
issues. Regarding awareness issues, L means the work deals with location, and S 
with social awareness. W and P indicate the work deal with workspace and peripheral 
awareness, respectively. Regarding mediation and accessibility, CM means the work 
proposes or implements co-located mediation, VM virtually co-located mediation, SI 
synchronous interaction and AI asynchronous interaction.  

Table 2. Characterization of selected published research works 

R  M/F  A/P  T 

Structure 

SPACES 

Geographical 
relationships 

Awareness 

PLACES 

Mediaton and 
accessibility 

MD 

 I 

 N 

 V 

 SP 

 DP 

 D 

 O 

 L 

 S 

 W 

 P  CM  VM 

 SI 

 AI 

* 

* 
  

* 

 
  
* 
  
4 

  

  
* 

  

* 
* 
  
* 
4 

? 

  
  

  

* 
* 
  
*  
4 

* 

* 
* 

* 

* 
  
* 
* 
7 

* 

* 
  

  

* 
* 
* 
* 
6 

* 

  
  

* 

  
  
* 
* 
4 

  

  
  

* 

  
  
  
  
1 

* 

* 
* 

  

* 
* 
* 
* 
7 

* 

  
  

* 

  
  
  
  
2 

* 

  
  

* 

  
  
  
  
2 

* 

  
* 

* 

  
* 
  
* 
5 

* 

  
  

  

  
  
  
  
1 

* 

  
* 

* 

  
  
  
* 
4 

* 

  
* 

  

* 
  
* 
  
4 

  

  
  

* 

  
  
  
  
1 

* 

* 
  

  

  
  
  
  
2 

* 

* 
* 

* 

* 
  
* 
* 
7 

  

  
* 

  

  
* 
  
* 
3 

[8]  KC 

[4]  DM 
[9]  CM 

[1]  DM 

[50]  CM 
[49]  CM 
[51]  CM 
[6]  CM 
# 

 

 

Half of the works referenced in Table 1 adopt mobile devices to capture data in the 
field, while a central server processes and aggregates this information. On the other 
hand, half of the works describe a proposal rather than a concrete application [3, 6, 
49, 50]. Only one of the works describes an application where users work in the same 
place, thus supporting co-located mediation. The works described in [6, 50, 51], propose 
 theoretical  models  where  data  is  gathered  in  the  field  and  synchronized  in  a 
central server. Most of the works are meant for people working in different places and 
only two of them use GPS to mark physical locations. Only one work considers social 
awareness. Regarding mediation and accessibility, two works consider virtual mediation,
 most of them synchronous.  

Most works stress the importance of designing simple user-interfaces and some of 
them  suggest  including  speech  recognition  [52,  53].  Most  works  adopt  gestures  to 
control  the  system  functionality,  including  marking  locations  on  maps,  identifying 
and associating the users’ comments and building awareness [7].  

Other  surveyed  works,  not  shown  on  Table  2  for  conciseness,  describe  the  advantages 
of using synchronously connected mobile devices with other physically or virtually 
 distributed  systems.  eMapBoard  [5],  is  a  geo-collaboration  tool  for  disaster  
management  offering  real-time  analysis  components.  It  implements  a  client/server  architecture 
and is intended to be used in control centers. Hence, it lacks the support for 
mobile  devices.  GeoMAC  (Geospatial  Multi-Agency  Coordination  Group)  is  a  webbased 
tool originally designed for fire managers accessing online maps of current fire 
locations and perimeters [54]. Detailed real-time information cannot be provided and it 
does not allow distributed collaboration. Toucan Navigate (http:www.infopatterns.com) 

284 

P. Antunes, G. Zurita, and N. Baloian 

is  a  P2P-based  collaborative  geographic  information  system  allowing  whole  teams  to 
concurrently interact with a map regardless of the physical location of its members. The 
annotations over the map are shared and updated automatically. However, it does not 
support  mobile  on-field  operators.  GeoConference  allows  exploiting  geographic  data 
using  standard  services.  In  a  geo-conference,  participants  share  information  in  a  synchronized 
geo-referenced workspace [55]. The GeoConference system includes tools to 
manage users, workgroups and geo-data access. It is mainly used in control centers and 
no real support for mobility is provided. ArcPAD is a mobile client/server GIS product 
developed  by  ESRI4.  ArcPAD  uses  handheld  and  mobile  devices,  and  provides  field 
operators with the ability to capture, analyze, and display geographic information [56]. 
It cannot be used for ad-hoc and on-field collaboration. 

4   Introducing a Geocollaboration Model 

The proposed geocollaboration model is organized in two ladders (see Figure 1). The 
first ladder defines places. In general terms, places deal with accessibility and mediation.
  We  define  places  as  a  combination  of  three  model  elements:  teams,  tasks  and 
artifacts. Teams of co-workers manipulate artifacts to accomplish tasks.  

The artifacts may be physical or virtual. We regard the manipulation of artifacts in 
a working context not an end in itself but a mean to manage the knowledge necessary 
to accomplish tasks.  A place  is therefore  where the  work is being done: a  team accomplishes 
a particular task using some specific artifacts in a place. In this ladder we 
do not relate the notion of place with the physical location of the team.  

In  the  second  ladder  we  consider  space.  Spaces  contain  multiple  places  and  the 
corresponding teams, artifacts and tasks. Spaces bring additional context to the above 
elements.  We  organize  these  contextual  elements  in  four  major  categories:  virtual, 
physical,  social  and  awareness  elements.  Concerning  the  virtual  properties,  they  
fundamentally  define  artifacts  according  to  structure,  interaction,  navigation  and  
visualization.  

The  physical  properties  such  as  location,  distance,  orientation  and  mobility  may 
characterize teams and tasks. If all team members are in the same physical place, then 
the place is co-located. If they are in different physical places and work in different 
tasks, then the places are remote. And if the team is dispersed across different physical 
locations but working in the same task, then the place is virtually co-located. This 
combination of elements is sufficiently abstract and flexible to afford the most common 
logical and physical arrangements that we find in CSCW.  

Regarding mobility, we consider the team members may either be fixed or wandering 
around the space. The artifacts may be fixed in one place, mobile or pervasive in 
the whole space.  

Spaces also deal with the social dimension, including collaborative capacity, sensemaking 
and embodied interaction. We realize that collaborative capacity has a significant 
impact in teams, tasks and artifacts. Teams with more collaborative capacity 
need shared artifacts to organize their work places according to increasing levels of 
communication, interaction, coordination, collaboration and negotiation support. The 
impact of this view is mostly associated with tasks and artifacts: designing more collaborative 
 artifacts  will  support  more  collaborative  tasks,  and  should  consequently 
lead to an increased collaborative capacity [2].  

 

A Model for Designing Geocollaborative Artifacts and Applications 

285 

Still regarding the social dimension, we realize that sensemaking concerns the articulation 
 of  teams,  tasks  and  artifacts.  Sensemakers  will  explore  different  work  arrangements 
in spaces and places, moving around artifacts in dynamic and exploratory 
ways.  Weick  [47]  illustrates  this  type  of  behavior  with  the  example  of  bringing  an 
airplane back to an aircraft carrier, where several people working in different places 
must contribute to complete successfully the operation.  

We  regard  the  sensemaking  function  in  conjunction  with  collaborative  capacity: 
sensemaking may be individual or collective, but we posit the collective construction 
of  sensemaking  will  lead  to  increased  organizational  ability  to  make  sense  of  the 
ongoing situations. And we finally emphasize that artifacts are instrumental to support 
increasing levels of sensemaking, from individual to collective.  

In our model, the notion of embodied interaction is mostly attached to physical artifacts 
 and  the  technology  they  provide  to  support  communication,  collaboration, 
mobility, and obtaining information from and about the environment.  

Finally, we consider the relationship between space and awareness. In the proposed 
model,  awareness  concerns  understanding  who  are  the  team  members,  where  and 
what tasks are being performed, what artifacts are being manipulated, and what relationships 
are established between places and geographical locations.  

Fig. 1. Geocollaboration model 

 

The two ladders previously described allow  us to define a design process in two 
complementary  steps.  The  first  ladder  assumes  a  descriptive  view  that  we  consider 
instrumental to analyze the “as-is” work situation:  

• 

• 

Identifying  the  work  elements:  Who  are  the  team  members?  Which  tasks 
they accomplish? Which are the relevant work places and spaces? Which artifacts 
are used?  
Identifying  their  relationships:  What  tasks  the  team  members  accomplish? 
What artifacts they manipulate to accomplish specific tasks? In what workplaces 
and workspaces reside the artifacts? How the team members, artifacts 
and tasks move around spaces? 

286 

P. Antunes, G. Zurita, and N. Baloian 

Then, the second ladder departs from the “as-is” to analyze the “to-be” situation. This 
step leads the designer towards analyzing how artifacts may develop:  

•  Collaborative  capacity:  What  is  the  current  level  of  collaborative  capacity? 

How to develop artifacts with increased collaborative capacity?  

•  Sensemaking:  What  is  the  current  level  of  sensemaking?  How  to  increase 

sensemaking? 

•  Awareness: Do artifacts support the diversity of location, social, workspace 

and peripheral awareness? How can awareness be improved?  

In Figure 1 we summarize the fundamental constructs of the proposed geocollaboration 
model. We note artifacts emerge as the central model element, not only because 
they are responsible for articulating teams, tasks, places and spaces, but because they 
became responsible for increasing awareness and collaboration support. 

5   Applications  

In this  section  we describe two application developments using the  geocolaboration 
model presented in the previous section.  

5.1   Redesigning a Geological Inventory Process 

This case concerns work redesign at a public agency responsible for inventorying and 
valuing the Portuguese geological resources. The core activities of this agency include 
studying  and  mapping  the  existing  resources,  developing  risk  maps,  and  producing 
geographical  information  systems.  The  case  study  was  focused  on  the  geological 
inventory process.  

The geocollaboration model organizes the analysis in two ladders. This structured 
approach was followed by the case study. The first ladder was defined during interviews 
with several experts from the agency. We identified two workplaces: the office 
and the field. In general, the inventory process requires multiple visits to the field to 
elicit various types of data, intertwined  with consolidation activities done in the office.
 The visits to the field tend to be done by one single person, while the office activities 
combine individual and collaborative work.  

The work arrangement was therefore structured around two different spaces (office 
and  the  field)  and  two  different  places  (visit  and  consolidation)  having  one-to-one 
relationships. Indeed, the inventory process seemed highly dependent on the relationship 
between place and space: many activities, such as determining the land structure, 
are  mostly done in the physical space, as the experts often  need to  move around to 
analyze different cues to determine the exact land structure. But the activities are also 
highly dependent on the  notion of place, especially in  what regards confronting  the 
opinions from experts in different fields, such as paleontology, petrology or sedimentology,
 which are done when consolidating work in the office.  

We  then  continued  the  study  by  observing  and  inquiring  people  working  in  the 
field. We analyzed the artifacts used by the experts. Work in the field is centered on 
two artifacts: the field book and the combination of a map with a transparent overlay. 
The map/overlay allows representing the inventory data, while the field book serves 
to annotate supplementary information, including doubts and concerns.  

 

A Model for Designing Geocollaborative Artifacts and Applications 

287 

Finally, in the second ladder, we analyzed the sensemaking and collaborative capacity 
 of  the  artifacts  used  by  the  target  organization.  We  realized  several  critical 
issues were hampering sensemaking:  

• 

•  Whenever doubts occur, workers have to switch places, either because they 
lack physical context (e.g., to triangulate different physical evidence) or social 
context (to triangulate with different experts). 
It was often difficult to use the book outside the field, because it would loose 
context. While consolidating  in the office,  workers need to reconstitute the 
visit to put back in context the data recorded in the field book.  
Information  was  scattered  between  the  field  book  and  map/overlay,  which 
were difficult to co-relate.  

• 

Fig. 2. Summary analysis of the geological inventory process 

 

Regarding  collaborative  capacity,  we  also  realized  the  field  book  is  inherently  a 
personal artifact, which looses value when working as a team in the office. The analysis 
of the geological inventory process is presented in Figure 2. Based on this analysis,
 we then defined our major technology requirements for work redesign:  

• 

•  Sharing the field book with the purpose to increase collaborative capacity. 
• 

Integrating the field book with the map/overlay, aiming to increase sensemaking.
  
Integrating the two places, visit and consolidation, bringing all relevant stakeholders 
together to resolve problems as they appear in the field and in the office,
 aiming again to increase collaborative capacity. This required integrating 
communication mechanisms (audio and instant text messaging) with the field 
book.  

These  requirements  lead  us  to  develop  a  prototype,  running  on  tablet  and  common 
PCs, integrating the field book and  map/overlay (see  Figure 3). This prototype also 
merged the visit and consolidation activities into one single place distributed across 

288 

P. Antunes, G. Zurita, and N. Baloian 

two  different  spaces:  field  and  office.  This  allowed  the  field  workers,  using  tablet 
PCs, to get in contact with the office workers and immediately exchanging comments 
on any occurring problems or doubts.  

The prototype supports data exchange, shared control and dynamic interaction. It 
also integrates GPS with instant text messaging. The exchanged instant text messages 
are preserved in the field book with automatic associations to the geographical position 
 of  the  field  workers,  thus  keeping  the  doubts,  comments  or  opinions  in  their 
proper context. Because many doubts are resolved in the field, there is less chance to 
swing back and forth between the office and the field.  

Fig. 3. Developed prototype for application 1 

 

The prototype was evaluated with a field test and contextual interviews with several 
experts from the agency. The obtained results indicate that the system increased 
sensemaking  and  collaborative  capability.  Related  to  sensemaking,  the  participants 
regarded  very  positively  the  expeditious  way  to  locate  points  and  associate  them  in 
the field book. Related with collaborative capability, the participants were extremely 
favorable to the communication between field and office workers, effectively resolving 
problems occurring in the field and thus simplifying the whole inventory process. 
More details about this case study can be found in [2]. 

5.2   Supporting the Evacuation of Crowded Places 

This  case  concerns  supporting  the  police  evacuating  people  from  a  stadium  or  any 
other facility  with capacity  for hosting thousands of people. The major problems to 
consider  are  finding  adequate  evacuation  routes,  spreading  out  people  in  congested 
places such as bus and/or metro stations and parking places, and dealing with highdensity 
and fluid crowds. These are frequent problems faced by the police in Santiago  
 

 

A Model for Designing Geocollaborative Artifacts and Applications 

289 

de Chile, where sports fields with capacity for 80.000 people were built in surroundings 
close to the city limits and now surrounded by busy streets and dense inhabited 
city quarters. In these events, the police will place agents in strategic places to patrol 
people coming out from the sports field, showing them the planned evacuation ways.  

Fig. 4. Summary analysis of the evacuation process 

 

Normally, each agent will have a radio device through which he/she will report the 
situation context to the central police station and colleagues. The agents in the central 
police station try to make a picture of the whole situation based on the scattered information 
 provided  verbally  by  the  agent.  The  central  police  station  will  give  commands 
to the agents in the field, managing any exceptional situations that may occur. 
This is a typical geocollaboration situation where location and collaboration are of 
critical importance. Analyzing the situation, in the first ladder we defined two spaces: 
police  station  and  field.  The  workplaces  are  the  police  station  and  some  strategic 
points in the field: stadium  gates, streets, parking places, bus and  metro stations. In 
the  field,  agents  have  to  watch  the  emergent  situations,  report  them  to  the  central 
station and give instructions to the mob.  

The main sensemaking task here is building a shared mental map of the situation, 
understanding the whole picture and anticipating events. This mental map is also the 
artifact used to communicate with each other. We detect here a main problem hampering 
this task: sometimes the exchange of voice information does not allow everyone 
 to  communicate  accurately,  timely  and  within  context.  Also,  the  whole  context 
may only be assembled in the central station, often with many delays. The summary 
analysis  of  the  evacuation  scenario  is  presented  in  Figure  4.  As  we  see,  the  central 
shared artifact is the area map. This map is situated at the central police station and is 
annotated according to the information people on the field submit by voice.  

 

290 

P. Antunes, G. Zurita, and N. Baloian 

Fig. 5. Developed prototype for application 2 

 

We designed a distributed application to  support this activity, allowing agents in 
the  police  station  to  display  the  map  on  a  big  touch-sensitive  screen  showing  the 
sports field and surrounding areas. The map may be annotated with freehand writing 
and  sketching.  Each  agent  in  the  field  has  a  portable  device,  also  touch  sensitive, 
showing the portion of the map where she/he is located, which they can also annotate. 
The map is automatically adjusted according to the agent’s position thanks to an incorporated 
 GPS.  All  applications  (the  one  running  in  the  police  station  and  those 
running  in  mobile  devices)  are  synchronized,  so  that  any  annotations  done  in  one 
application  will be immediately  shown in the others. In Figure 5  we  may see  some  
 

 

A Model for Designing Geocollaborative Artifacts and Applications 

291 

screenshots  showing  the  map  available  in  the  police  station  (upper  section)  and  the 
mobile  devices  of  three  agents  in  the  field  (lower  section).  Another  design  element 
focusing on awareness concerns the areas marked and labeled with a number, indicating 
 what  areas  the  agents  in  the  field  are  controlling.  In  this  way  the  agents  in  the 
station may perceive the whole control of the situation. Furthermore, the agents may 
synchronize their portion of the map with another agent. This supports the collaboration 
of two (or more) agents in charge of the same geographical area. In Figure 5 we 
see that policeman 1 and policeman 2 are working synchronized in the area labeled as 
1. This prototype is currently being developed and there is still no data from formal 
evaluation available. 

6   Discussion 

This paper proposes a model for designing geocollaborative applications. The model 
considers the main design goal is supporting a team in the collaborative construction 
of  a  shared  vision  about  the  relevant  conditions  in  a  certain  geographical  area,  in 
situations where this vision is critical for team members to accomplish their task. The 
model  is  based  on  a  set  of  foundational  concepts,  including  teams,  tasks,  places, 
spaces, and artifacts. Artifacts emerge as the central model element, not only because 
they are responsible for articulating teams, tasks, places and spaces, but also because 
they are responsible for increasing sensemaking and collaborative capacity.  

In  order  to  test  the  model  flexibility  and  completeness,  we  used  it  to  design  two 
quite different applications. The model provided guidelines that helped analyzing and 
articulating the geocollaborative requirements of those applications.  

Moreover, the proposed model also allows describing various geocollaboration applications 
 in  a  uniform  and  standardized  way,  and  therefore  facilitates  their  benchmarking 
 and  classification.  In  addition,  the  proposed  model  allows  identifying  the 
major software components and libraries necessary to integrate the geocollaborative 
elements  proposed  in  the  model.  Some  of  these  software  components  have  already 
been  developed  to  implement  the  applications  described  in  the  paper  and  constitute 
the basis of a future geocollaborative software platform.  

The proposed model may also serve to lay out the conceptual framework necessary 
to characterize two emerging types of tools: e-planning and e-participation. The aim 
of e-planning and e-participation is to engage people living in a region or urban area 
to participate in government decisions and urban planning.  
 
Acknowledgements.  This  paper  was  supported  by  the  Portuguese  Foundation  for 
Science and Technology (PTDC/EIA/67589/2006) and Fondecyt 1085010. 

References 

1.  MacEachren,  A.,  Guoray,  C.,  Brewer,  I.,  Chen,  J.:  Supporting  Map-Based  geocollaboration 
through Natural Interfaces to Large-Screen Displays. Cartographic Perspectives 54, 4–
22 (2006) 

2.  Omitted  to  allow  blind  review:  A  Conceptual  Framework  for  the  Design  of  GeoCollaborative 
Systems. Group Decision and Negotiation 15, 273–295 (2006) 

292 

P. Antunes, G. Zurita, and N. Baloian 

3.  Cai,  G.:  Extending  Distributed  GIS  to  Support  Geo-Collaborative  Crisis  Management. 

Progress in Human Geography 25 (2001) 

4.  Rinner,  C.:  Argumentation  Mapping  in  Collaborative  Spatial  Decision  Making.  In:  Collaborative 
GIS, pp. 85–102. Idea Group Publishing, USA (2006) 

5.  MacEachren,  A.,  Guoray,  C.,  Brewer,  I.,  Chen,  J.: Visually  Enabled  geocollaboration to 
Support Data Exploration & Decision Making. In: Procs. of the 21st International Cartographic 
Conference, Durban, South Africa, pp. 10–16 (2003) 

6.  Capata, A., Marella, A., Russo, R.: A Geo-Based Application for the Managemnt of Mobile 
 Actors  During  Crisis  Situations.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  5th  International  ISCRAM 
Conference, Washington DC, US (2008) 

7.  Schafer, W., Ganoe, C., Caroll, C.: Supporting Community Emergency Management Planning 
through a geocollaboration Software Architecture. Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work 16, 501–537 (2007) 

8.  Convertino, G., Ganoe, C., Schafer, W., Yost, B., Carroll, J.: A Multiple View Approach 
to Support Common Ground in Distributed and Synchronous Geo-Collaboration. In: Proceedings 
 of  Third  International  Conference  on  Coordinated  and  Multiple  Views  in  Exploratory 
Visualization, pp. 121–132 (2005) 

9.  Convertino, G., Zhao, D., Ganoe, C., Carroll, J., Rosson, M.: A Role-Based Multiple View 
Approach to Distributed Geo-Collaboration. Human-Computer Interaction 4553, 561–570 
(2007) 

10.  MacEachren, A., Cai, G., Sharma, R., Rauschert, I., Brewer, I., Bolelli, L., Shaparenko, B., 
Fuhrmann,  S.,  Wang,  H.:  Enabling  Collaborative  Geoinformation  Access  and  Decision 
Making through a Natural, Mulimodal Interface. International Journal of Geographical Information 
Science 19, 293–317 (2005) 

11.  Johansen, R., Sibbet, D., Benson, S., Martin, A., Mittman, R., Saffo, P.: Leading Business 

Teams. Addison-Wesley, Reading (1991) 

12.  MacEachren,  A.,  Brewer,  I.:  Developing  a  Conceptual  Framework  for  Visually-Enabled 
geocollaboration.  International  Journal  of  Geographical  Information  Science 18,  1–34 
(2004) 

13.  DeSanctis, G., Gallupe, R.: A Foundation for the Study of Group Decision Support Systems.
 Management Science 33, 589–609 (1987) 

14.  Sharifi, S., Pawar, K.: Virtually Co-Located Product Design Teams. International Journal 

of Operations & Production Management 22, 656–679 (2002) 

15.  Rodden, T., Blair, G.: CSCW and Distributed Systems: The Problem of Control. In: Proceedings 
of the Second Conference on European Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative 
Work, pp. 49–64. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Amsterdam (1991) 

16.  Kim, T., Chang, A., Holland, L., Pentland, A.: Meeting Mediator: Enhancing Group Collaborationusing 
Sociometric Feedback. In: Proceedings of the ACM 2008 Conference on 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work, pp. 457–466. ACM Press, San Diego (2008) 

17.  Daft, R., Lengel, R.: Organizational Information Requirements, Media Richness and Structural 
Design. Management Science 32 (1986) 

18.  Kock, N.: Media Richness or Media Naturalness? The Evolution of Our Biological Communication 
Apparatus and Its Influence on Our Behavior toward E-Communication Tools. 
IEEE Transactions on Professional Communications 48, 117–130 (2005) 

19.  Dix, A., Rodden, T., Davies, N., Trevor, J., Friday, A., Palfreyman, K.: Exploiting Space 
and Location as a Design Framework for Interactive Mobile Systems. ACM Transactions 
on CHI 7 (2000) 

 

A Model for Designing Geocollaborative Artifacts and Applications 

293 

20.  Harrison, S., Dourish, P.: The Roles of Place and Space in Collaborative Systems. In: Proceedings 
of the 1996 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work, pp. 67–
76. ACM Press, Boston (1996) 

21.  Dourish, P.: Re-Space-Ing Place: “Place” And “Space” Ten Years on. In: Proceedings of 
the  2006  20th  Anniversary  Conference  on  Computer  Supported  Cooperative  Work,  pp. 
299–308. ACM Press, Alberta (2006) 

22.  Rodden, T.: Populating the Application: A Model of Awareness for Cooperative Applications.
 In: Proceedings of the 1996 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work, pp. 87–96. ACM Press, Boston (1996) 

23.  Greenberg, S., Boyle, M., Laberge, J.: PDAs and Shared Public Displays: Making Personal 
Information  Public,  and  Public  Information  Personal.  Personal  Technologies 3,  54–64 
(1999) 

24.  Snowdon,  D.,  Munro,  A.  (eds.):  Collaborative  Virtual  Environments:  Digital  Places  and 

Spaces for Interaction. Springer, New York (2000) 

25.  Greenberg, S., Roseman, M.: Using a Room Metaphor to Ease Transitions in Groupware. 
In: Ackerman, M., Pipek, V., Wulf, V. (eds.) Sharing Expertise. Beyond Knowledge Management,
 pp. 203–256. The MIT Press, Cambridge (2003) 

26.  Grønbæk,  K.,  Vestergaard,  P.,  Ørbæk,  P.:  Towards  Geo-Spatial  Hypermedia:  Concepts 
and Prototype Implementation. In: Proceedings of the thirteenth ACM conference on Hypertext 
and hypermedia, pp. 117–126. ACM Press, College Park (2002) 

27.  Brewer, I., MacEachren, A., Abdo, H., Gundrum, J., Otto, G.: Collaborative Geographic 
Visualization:  Enabling  Shared  Understanding  of  Environmental  Processes.  In:  Proceedings 
of IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization, Washington DC, p. 137 (2000) 

28.  Kristoffersen,  S.,  Ljungberg,  F.:  Your  Mobile  Computer  Is  a  Stationary  Computer.  In: 

CSCW 1998 Handheld CSCW Workshop, Seattle (1998) 

29.  Cheverst, K., Davies, N., Mitchell, K., Friday, A., Efstratiou, C.: Developing a ContextAware 
 Electronic  Tourist  Guide:  Some  Issues  and  Experiences.  In:  Proceedings  of  the 
SIGCHI  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems,  pp.  17–24.  ACM  Press, 
The Hague (2000) 

30.  Davis, G.: Anytime/Anyplace Computing and the Future of Knowledge Work. Communications 
of ACM 45, 67–73 (2002) 

31.  Koch, M., Koch, J.: Application of Frameworks in Groupware—the Iris Group Editor Environment.
 ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 32 (2000) 

32.  Liechti, O.: Supporting Social Awareness on the World Wide Web with the Handheld Cyberwindow.
 In: Workshop on Handheld CSCW at CSCW 1998, Seattle, US (1998) 

33.  Gutwin, C., Greenberg, S.: The Effects of Workspace Awareness Support on the Usability 
of  Real-Time  Distributed  Groupware.  ACM  Transactions  on  Computer-Human  Interaction 
6, 243–281 (1999) 

34.  Nyerges, T., Montejano, R., Oshiro, C., Dadswell, M.: Group-Based Geographic Information 

Systems for Transportation Site Selection. Transportation Research C 5, 349–369 (1997) 

35.  Armstrong, M.: Requirements for the Development of GIS-Based Group Decision Support 

Systems. Journal of the American Society for Information Science 45, 669–677 (1994) 

36.  Manoharan, T., Taylor, H., Gardiner, P.: A Collaborative Analysis Tool for Visualisation 
and Interaction with Spatial Data. In: Proceeding of the seventh international conference 
on 3D Web technology, Tempe, Arizona, pp. 75–83 (2002) 

37.  MacEachren,  A.,  Edsall,  R.,  Haug,  D.,  Baxter,  R.,  Otto,  G.,  Masters,  R.,  Fuhrmann,  S., 
Qian,  L.:  Virtual  Environments  for  Geographic  Visualization:  Potential  and  Challenges. 
In: Procs. of the 1999 workshop on new paradigms in information visualization and manipulation,
 pp. 35–40. ACM Press, Kansas City (1999) 

294 

P. Antunes, G. Zurita, and N. Baloian 

38.  Nunamaker,  J.,  Romano,  N.,  Briggs,  R.:  Increasing  Intellectual  Bandwidth:  Generating 
Value from Intellectual Capital with Information Technology. Group Decision and Negotiation 
11, 69–86 (2002) 

39.  Bach, C., Belardo, S., Faerman, S.: Employing the Intellectual Bandwidth Model to Measure 
Value Creation in Collaborative Environments. In: Proceeding of the 37th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences, Hawaii (2004) 

40.  Qureshi, S., Briggs, R.: Revision the Intellectual Bandwidth Model and Exploring Its Use 
by a Corporate Management Team. In: Proceeding of the 36th Hawaii International Conference 
on System Sciences, Hawaii (2003) 

41.  Qureshi,  S.,  Vaart,  A.,  Kaulingfreeks,  G.,  Vreede,  G.,  Briggs,  R.,  Nunamaker,  J.:  What 
Does It Mean for an Organization to Be Intelligent? Measuring Intellectual Bandwidth for 
Value  Creation.  In:  Proceeding  of  the  35th  Hawaii  International  Conference  on  System 
Sciences, Hawaii (2002) 

42.  Omitted to allow blind review.: Addressing the Conflicting Dimension of Groupware: A 
Case Study in Software Requirements Validation. Computing and Informatics 25, 523–546 
(2006) 

43.  Brewer, J., Dourish, P.: Storied Spaces: Cultural Accounts of Mobility, Technology, and 
Environmental Knowing. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 66, 963–976 
(2008) 

44.  Weick,  K.:  The  Collapse  of  Sensemaking  in  Organizations:  The  Mann  Gulch  Disaster. 

Administrative Science Quarterly 38, 628–652 (1993) 

45.  Larsson,  A.:  Making  Sense  of  Collaboration:  The  Challenge  of  Thinking  Together  in 
Global Design Teams. In: Proceedings of the 2003 international ACM SIGGROUP conference 
on Supporting group work, pp. 153–160. ACM Press, Sanibel Island (2003) 

46.  Hasan, H., Gould, E.: Support for the Sense-Making Activity of Managers. Decision Support 
Systems 31, 71–86 (2001) 

47.  Weick, K.: Making Sense of the Organization. Blackwell, Oxford (2001) 
48.  Dourish, P.: Where the Action Is. The MIT Press, Cambridge (2001) 
49.  Malizia, A., Astorga, F., Onorati, T., Díaz, P., Aedo, I.: Emergency Alerts for All: An Ontology 
Based Approach to Improve Accessibility in Emergency Alerting Systems. In: Proceedings 
of the 5th International ISCRAM Conference (2008) 

50.  Bortenschlager, M., Leitinger, S., Rieser, H., Steinmann, R.: Towards a P2P-Based geocollaboration 
System for Disaster Management. In: GI-Days 2007 - Young Researchers Forum 
(2007) 

51.  Convertino, G., Mentis, H., Bhambare, P., Ferro, C., Carroll, J., Rosson, M.: Comparing 
Media in Emmergency Planning. In: Proceedings of the 5th International ISCRAM Conference,
 Washington DC, US (2008) 

52.  Sharma, R., Yeasin, M., Krahnstoever, N., Rauschert, I., Cai, G.: Speech-Gesture Driven 
Multimodal Interfaces  for Crisis  Management. Proceedings of the IEEE special issue on 
Multimodal Human-Computer Interface 91, 1327–1354 (2003) 

53.  Fuhrmann, S., MacEachren, A., Dou, J., Wang, K., Cox, A.: Gesture and SpeechBased 

Maps to Support Use of GIS for Crisis Management: A User Study. In: AutoCarto 2005, 
Las Vegas, US (2005) 

54.  Wagtendon, J., Zhu, Z., Lile, E.: Appendix E - White Paper on Pre-Fire Risk Assessment 

and Fuels Mapping (2004) 

55.  Siegel, C., Fortin, D., Pellerin, E.: Bringing Geospatial Expertise to Emergency Operations 
Management with Geoconferencing. In: Proceedings of the 98th Conference of the Canadian 
Institute of Geomatics, Ottawa, Canada (2005) 

56.  ESRI: Arcgis 9, Arcpad Reference Guide, USA (2005) 

