Monitoring Physical Activities Using Smartphones  

Pablo Romo1, Sergio F. Ochoa1, Nelson Baloian1, Ignacio Casas2, and José Bravo3 

1 Computer Science Department, University of Chile 
Av. Blanco Encalada 2120, 3rd Floor, Santiago, Chile 
{promo,sochoa,nbaloian}@dcc.uchile.cl 

2 Computer Science Department, Pontifical Catholic University of Chile 

Av. V. Mackenna 4860, Santiago, Chile 

icasas@ing.puc.cl 

3 Castilla-La Mancha University 

Ciudad Real, Spain 

jose.bravo@uclm.es 

Abstract. It is well-known that physical activities contribute to keep the people 
healthy.  However,  the  modern  life  style  impacts  negatively  on  the  amount  of 
physical  activity  that  we  do  during  the  day.  Many  times  the  people  do  not 
perform enough exercise because they are not aware of the amount of physical 
activity that they have done. In order to make the persons aware of this aspect 
of his life, this article presents a mobile application that monitors the amount of 
exercise  they  do  every  day  and  it  informs  properly  to  the  user.  The  system, 
named AMOPA, allows caregivers or doctors monitoring particular patients, to 
access  this  information  remotely  in  order  to  support  the  person  being 
monitored.  The  system  was  evaluated  using  laboratory  tests,  and  the  results 
indicate  a  good  performance  and  accuracy  in  the  detection  of  the  people 
physical  activities.  Moreover,  the  monitored  process  has  a  low  impact  on  the 
energy consumption of the devices used to capture and process the information.  

Keywords: Monitoring of physical activities, healthcare, model lifestyle, urban 
population. 

1 

Introduction 

The  modern  life  style  has  brought  us  comfort,  safety  and  fast-access  services 
according to our needs and interests. However, this impacts negatively on the amount 
of  physical  activity  that  we  do  every  day,  and  consequently,  on  our  physical  and 
mental condition. This situation is emphasized in urban areas, where the comfort and 
services for the people tends to be more available, affordable and easy to access [1]. 

The indicators in most countries around the world show high and growing rates of 
sedentarism  in  urban  populations.  Particularly  in  Chile  we  can  see  that  70%  of  the 
people  do  not  perform  physical  activity,  and  90%  of  them  can  be  considered  as 
sedentary [2].  

Usually the people are not aware of the amount of physical activity that they do and 
have to do during the day. This limitation makes that many people, who can and want 

R. Hervás et al. (Eds.): UCAmI 2014, LNCS 8867, pp. 388–395, 2014. 
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014 

 

Monitoring Physical Activities Using Smartphones 

389 

take some action for reducing their sedentarism, cannot do it because they are not aware 
of this situation. This lack of awareness represents is an important restriction to face this 
syndrome, and thus to reduce its consequences on the people health.  

There  are  also  other  cases,  in  which  people  (usually  older  adults)  have  to  do 
physical exercises daily, because of  medical prescription, as a  way to improve their 
health conditions. Although a person decides to do it, addressing this challenge would 
require  perseverance,  commitment  and  usually  external  support.  Today,  there  are 
many commercial systems that allow a person to monitor how much exercise he has 
done  during  the  day,  but  just  few  of  them  are  usable  for  elderly  people.  Moreover, 
people in charge of providing external support do not count on an easy way to know 
when the monitored person (e.g., an older adult) has done his daily physical activities, 
and thus determine if they have to take some action or not to help reach such a goal. 

This  article  presents  a  mobile  application  named  AMOPA  (Application  for 
Monitoring Physical Activity),  which has been designed to support older adults and 
the people providing external help (e.g. caregivers or relatives of an older adult). The 
application runs on a smartphone, and it uses its peripherals to determine the amount 
of physical activity performed by its user. Such information is delivered properly to 
the monitored persons and also to monitoring people. Thus, the system makes them 
aware about the amount to physical activity that has been done. The users can access 
to an historical record of their physical activity to see the evolution in the time. This 
service is also available for monitoring people. 

Next section presents the related work. Section 3 describes the architecture of the 
monitoring  systems  and  its  main  components.  Section  4  shows  the  main  user 
interfaces of the system and services provided through them. Section 5 presents and 
discusses the preliminary results. Section 6 shows the conclusions and future work.  

2 

Related Work 

Several solutions have been proposed to monitor the physical activities of the people, 
which  are  typically  focused  on  gathering  information  to  support  particular  health 
treatments. For instance, Guo [3] developed a mobile solution that records the number 
of steps done by a person and the number calories spent  on it. The application also 
delivers voice messages to the monitored person encourage him to perform physical 
activity when needed. This application was particularly designed to support patients 
with mental disorders, and it does not allow the participation of monitoring people. 

Oner  et  al.  [4]  propose  a  mobile  application  that  runs  on  a  smartphone  and 
monitors the balance of a person while waking. The application intends to determine, 
in  an  early  stage,  the  risk  of  falls  in  elderly  people,  and  eventually  to  deliver 
notifications to caregivers or medical personnel that monitor the elderly. 

Shin  et  al.  [5]  developed  an algorithm  to  recognize  physical  activities  also  using 
mobile  devices.  Their  algorithm  tries  to  reduce  the  energy  consumption  using  an 
external  device  attached  to  a  smartphone.  Energy  consumption  is  always  a  major 
concern of the mobile software applications [6], and few of them really consider this 
design aspect.  

390 

P. Romo et al. 

3 

Architecture of the System 

The  application  for  monitoring  physical  activity  (AMOPA)  uses  a  client-server 
architecture,  but  the  relationship  between  client  and  server  is  loosely-coupled.  This 
means that each component works independently of the other, but particular services 
are provided when both components are available at the same time.  

The client component considers both, a local and a remote monitoring application. 
The first one runs in the smartphone of the people being monitored, and it works in 
background  most  the  time.  This  component  is  used  to  gather  information  about  the 
physical activity performed by the user and to provide him awareness about it. Such 
information is also stored in the server during pre-established periods. 

The  remote  monitoring  application  retrieves  the  information  stored  in  the  server 
and  informs  to  external  users  about  the  physical  activity  performed  by  the  person 
monitored  by  them.  This  information  can  be  retrieved  on-demand  and  it  considers 
both, new and historical data.  

The  server  acts  as  a  (loosely-coupled)  intermediary  between  these  two  client 
applications  and  the  collected  data.  Figure  1  shows  the  system  architecture,  which 
considers the previously mentioned components. 

 

Fig. 1. Architecture of AMOPA 

 

 

Monitoring Physical Activities Using Smartphones 

391 

During  the  system  design  we  considered  two  different  strategies  for  determining 
the amount of physical activity performed by a person. The first strategy was based on 
counting steps, and the second one  was  focused on determining the intensity of the 
physical  activity  per  time  unit.  Both  strategies  use  the  accelerometer  to  capture  the 
basic information used to calculate the indicators. We decided do not use the GPS for 
supporting  these  monitoring  activities,  as  a  way  to  keep  the  energy  consumption  of 
the  mobile  applications  under  control.  Clearly,  if  these  applications  consume  much 
energy, jeopardizes the usefulness of the proposed system. 

Following this goal, the data captured by the mobile sensing application is sent to 
the server every one hour, whenever people are monitoring to the local user. In other 
case the data is sent once per day. 

3.1 

First Measurement Strategy 

As  mentioned  before,  the  first  approach  considered  steps  counting.  After  analyzing 
various third-party services we realized that most of them imposed restrictions to the 
system implementation, and they did not provide accurate information. Therefore, we 
decided  to  implement  a  pedometer,  which  considers  the  number  of  steps  done  by  a 
person, and also his velocity, to determine an indicator that represents the amount of 
calories spent by the user. The identification of steps is done by comparing the last 
movement of the user, with the next one. The accuracy of this comparison depends on 
the  place  in  which  the  smartphone  is  placed.  For  instance,  if  the  device  is  in  a  belt 
case, the step recognition is much more accurate than if it is in the pocket.   

3.2 

Second Measurement Strategy 

Recent  studies  indicate  that  walking  30  minutes  per  day  has  important  long  term 
benefits  for  health  condition  of  the  people.  Every  walking  activity  must  involve  at 
least  10  minutes  for  being  considered  useful  for  the  people  health.  Therefore,  the 
mobile application must determine if the walking periods of a person contribute or not 
to improve his health condition.  

Using  the  accelerometer,  the  application  determines  the  intensity  and  duration  of 
the  people  activities.  These  activities  are  then  classified  by  intensity  using  the 
Dynamic Time Warping algorithm [7]. This algorithm uses pre-loaded values for each 
user, which are gathered during a setting process of the application. Then, considering 
the  activity  duration  and  intensity  we  can  determine  if  the  activity  should  be 
computed or not by the system.  

4 

Implemented System 

Next sections show the user interface of both monitoring client applications, and also 
the services that they provide to the users. 

4.1  Local Monitoring System 

As mentioned before, this component runs in the smartphone of the monitored person. 
The  main  services  provided  by  this  module  are:  registration,  self-monitoring, 

392 

P. Romo et al. 

monitoring  of  other  people  (remote  monitoring),  history  of  physical  activity,  and 
check the list of monitored devices. Fig. 2 presents the main the user interfaces. 

When the person creates a user account into the application, he has to choose if he 
will  use  the  system  for  self-monitoring  or  monitoring  to  other  people  (Fig.  2.a  and 
2.b). Depending on that decision the application presents different services to the user.  

 

  

 

 

                (a)                              (b)                            (c)                                (d) 

Fig. 2. Main user interfaces of the local monitoring component 

Once  completed  the  registration  process,  the  smartphone  starts  to  record  the 
physical activity using a service that runs in background. The recorded information is 
periodically  sent  to  the  server.  If  the  user  decides  turn  off  his  telephone,  the 
application  will  be  automatically  opened  the  next  time  that  the  device  is  turned  on. 
Therefore, the user does not longer need to trigger the monitoring process. 

When the user checks the physical activity that he has done during the day, the user 
interface  shows  him  the  average  speed  and  the  number  of  steps  done  during  the 
walking  activities  (Fig.  2.c).  Through  such  an  interface  the  user  can  access  his 
historical record (activity log) and ask for a particular day. In that case the application 
shows him a summary of the calories burned during the day, the number of steps and 
the average velocity of the user during the physical activity periods (Fig. 2.d). 

4.2  Remote Monitoring Application 

This Web information system allows users to monitor the physical activities of other 
users. Figure 3 shows the main user interface of the activity log, which is accessed by 
choosing  a  particular  day  and  monitored  device.  The  results  are  shown  in  a  simple 
way to ease its readability.  

5 

Preliminary Results 

This section presents the results of the three tests performed to the system. The first 
two tests are  focused on determining the system accuracy  during the data gathering 
process (i.e. while collecting the physical activity of the user). The last test identifies 
the energy consumption of the system and compares it with other proposals.  

 

Monitoring Physical Activities Using Smartphones 

393 

Fig. 3. View of the activity log 

 

5.1  Accuracy of the Pedometer 

A  test  was  done  not  only  to  the  implemented  pedometer,  but  also  to  other 
implementations.  The  test  involved  to  walk  ten  steps  using  the  smartphone  in  the 
pocket  of  the  user’s  pant,  which  is  probably  the  worst  place  (in  terms  of  sensing 
capability)  to  locate  the  smartphone.  During  the  test  the  user  had  to  walk  to  three 
different speeds. This was monitored by an assistant who was in charge of ensuring 
that  the  samples  were  comparable.  This  activity  was  repeated  five  times  for  each 
velocity; Fig. 4 shows the average error rates in the step detection. 

 

 

 

Fig. 4. Error rate using the pedometer 

 

394 

P. Romo et al. 

The results show that AMOPA has a 60% of error. Although this value is high, it is 
lower than most of the other implementations that were evaluated. This rate falls to 
5%  if  the  device  is  located  in  a  belt  case,  which  is  clearly  appropriate  to  monitor 
physical activity.  

5.2  Accuracy Using the Intensity Approach 

This test involved a person walking during 20 minutes to a constant velocity. Three 
different velocities were used in this test: low (0.6 m/s), medium (1 m/s) and high (1.4 
m/s). Table 1 shows the accuracy of the system detecting the intensity of the people 
movements.  These  results  show  a  high  accuracy  in  the  detection  of  the  movement 
intensity; therefore it can also be used to determine the physical activity of the people. 

 

Table 1. Pedometer accuracy  

Table 2. Energy consumption 

Test 
Test 1 
Test 2 
Test 3 

Accuracy 

97% 
94% 
99% 

 

Experiment  Accelerometer AMOPA

Total Energy 
Consumption 

Test 1 
Test 2 
Test 3 

8% 
6% 
5% 

4% 
5% 
2% 

12% 
11% 
7%   

5.3  Energy Consumption 

In order to determine the energy consumption of the system, we used three different 
devices. The test considered devices with full charge used by the same user during the 
same time period. Once the  AMOPA system is triggered, the application  monitored 
the  person  activity  during  six  hour.  After  that  period  we  checked  the  amount  of 
energy  consumption  by  device,  considering  both 
the 
accelerometer.  Table  2  shows  the  obtained  results.  There  we  can  see  that  the  total 
consumption  is  around  10%  after  six  hours,  which  does  not  produce  an  important 
impact on the device autonomy. 

the  application  and 

6 

Conclusions and Future Work 

This article presents a software system that allows people, particularly older adults, to 
monitor their physical activities. This information can also be accessed remotely and 
on-demand by caregivers, doctors or monitoring people. The system implemented two 
complimentary  mechanisms  for  detecting  the  physical  activity  of  the  monitored 
person;  i.e.  a  pedometer  and  an  indicator  of  the  intensity  of  the  user’s  movements. 
Considering  both  mechanisms  the  system  records  and  informs  the  physical  activity 
performed by the user. 

The accuracy of these mechanisms is quite good to make suitable estimations, and 
the  energy  consumption  of  the  system  is  also  acceptable  for  monitoring  activities.  

 

Monitoring Physical Activities Using Smartphones 

395 

The  users  participating  in  the  preliminary  evaluations  found  the  system  usable  and 
useful. However, additional and formal test needs to be conducted in this sense to see 
the real impact of this proposal. 

Acknowledgments.  This  work  has  been  supported  by  Fondecyt  (Chile),  Grant  Nº 
1120207;  FONDEF,  Grant:  D10i1286;  and  by  the  UBIHEALTH  project,  FP7-
PEOPLE-2012-IRSES, European Commission, Grant: 316337. 

References 

1.  Bernstein, M.S., Morabia, A., Sloutskis, D.: Definition and prevalence of sedentarism in an 

urban population. American J. Public Health 89(6), 862–867 (1999) 

2.  Chilean National Institute of Sports, National Study on Sports and Healthy Habits on People 
over  18  Years  Old  (in  Spanish)  (2010),  http://www.ind.cl/estudios-e-
investigacion/investigaciones/Documents/2012/encuesta_naciona
l_habitos.pdf 

3.  Guo,  Q.:  Android  Health-Care  App:  Multi-function  Step  Counter.  Master  Thesis,  Mid 
Sweden University, Faculty of Science, Technology and Media, Department of Information 
Technology and Media (2012) 

4.  Oner,  M.,  Pulcifer-Stump,  J.,  Seeling,  P.,  Kaya,  T.:  Towards  the  Run  and  Walk  Activity 
Classification through Step Detection: An Android Application. In: Proceedings of the 34th 
Annual International Conference of the Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, pp. 
1980–1983 (2012) 

5.  Shin,  J.,  Shin,  D.,  Shin,  D.,  Her,  S.,  Kim,  S.,  Lee,  M.:  Human  Movement  Detection 
Algorithm Using 3-Axis Accelerometer Sensor Based on Low-Power Management Scheme 
for  Mobile  Health  Care  System.  In:  Bellavista,  P.,  Chang,  R.-S.,  Chao,  H.-C.,  Lin,  S.-F., 
Sloot, P.M.A. (eds.) GPC 2010. LNCS, vol. 6104, pp. 81–90. Springer, Heidelberg (2010) 

6.  Ferreira,  D.,  Dey,  A.K.,  Kostakos,  V.:  Understanding  Human-Smartphone  Concerns:  A 
Study  of  Battery  Life.  In:  Lyons,  K.,  Hightower,  J.,  Huang,  E.M.  (eds.)  Pervasive  2011. 
LNCS, vol. 6696, pp. 19–33. Springer, Heidelberg (2011) 

7.  Muller, M.: Dynamic Time Warping. In: Information Retrieval for Music and Motion, ch. 4, 

pp. 69–84. Springer (2007) 

