Technologies and Educational Activities  for 
Supporting and Implementing  ChallengeBased 
 Learning 

Nelson Baloian  , Kay Hoeksema  , Ulrich Hoppe  and Marcelo Milrad 

Depto. de Ciencias de la Computacion  Universidad de Chile, Santiago 

js de la Computacion  Universidad 
n b a l o i a n S d c c . u c h i l e . cl 

Institute for Computer Science and Interactive Systems, 

University  of Duisburg-Essen,  Germany 
h o p p e } Q c o l l i d e . i n fo 
{hoeksema, 

Center for Learning and Knowledge Technologies (CeLeKT), 

Vaxjo  University,  Sweden 

m a r c e lo  .inilrad@msi   . v x u.  se 

to  web  resources  and  specific  software 

Abstract.  Our Challenge-Based  Learning (CBL) method can be described  as a 
special  form of problem-based  learning, in which the problems are of realistic, 
open-ended  nature.  Additionally,  CBL  contains  features  of  experiential  and 
project-based  learning  approaches.  CBL  is  supported  by  the  provision  of 
Digital  Experimentation  Toolkits  (DExTs)  which  comprise  materials,  initial 
instructions,  references 
tools. 
Technological  challenges  lie  in the ease  of use  in  accessing  these  data  and  in 
communicating  the  learners'  requests  and  specifications  to  the  remote  sites. 
Within  this  article  we  describe  several  classroom  scenarios  for  the  usage  of 
DexTs  in  schools.  Examples  are  the  calculation  of  the  epicenter  of  an 
earthquake, the calculation  of lunar  heights and the definition  of strategies  for 
navigation  in  a  maze.  The  activities  described  in  this  paper  were  conducted 
within  the  framework  of  our  COLDEX  project  (Collaborative  Learning  and 
Distributed  Experimentation,  http://www.coldex.info). 

1 

Introduction 

Although  computer  support  for  learning  was  in  the  early  days  aimed  for  the 
individual  learner  today  we  find  an  increasing  number  of  applications  supporting 
collaborative  learning.  Collaborative  learning  has  been  defined  as  groups  working 
together  for  a common  purpose.  It is hard  to  explain  that the  learning  theories  which 
are  based  in  the  collaborative  interaction  between  learners  are  entirely  responsible 
for  this  shift  of  paradigm.  The  development  of  communications,  and  computer 
cotmectivity  are  certainly  also  responsible  for  the  shift  in  the  way  people  work,  play, 

Please  use  the following  formatwhen 

citing  this  chapter: 

Balioan,  N.,  Hoeksema,  K.,  Hoppe, U.,  Milrad,  M.,  2006,  in  International  Federation  for  Information  Processing,  Vol(cid:173)
ume  210, Education  for  the  2 1" Century-Impact  of  ICT  and  Digital  Resources,  eds.  D.  Kumar,  and  Turner  J.,  (Boston; 
Springer), pp.  7-16. 

8 

Nelson Baloian, Kay Hoeksema, Ulrich Hoppe and Marcelo Milrad 

learn.  However,  authors  of  systems  and  methodologies 

and 
implementing 
Computer-Supported  Cooperative  Learning  (CSCL)  are  constantly  turning  their 
attention to these theories for inspiring or justifying  their work. 

Vygotsky's  sociocultural  theory  [1]  promotes  the  importance  of  social 
interaction and the use of artefacts  for knowledge  acquisition.  Three principles have 
been proposed  for  the  design  of educational  environments  derived  from  Vygotsky's 
works  [2].  First, the notion of authentic activities proposes the modeling of activities 
and  tools  derived  from  professional  practices.  Second,  "construction"  refers  to 
learners  creating  and  sharing  artefacts  within  their  community.  Third,  educational 
environments  should be  designed to facilitate  a close collaboration between  learners 
and their peers  as well as between  students  and experts.  Regarding  these  principles 
several  educational  scenarios  have  been  developed  within  the  COLD EX  project. 
The  COLDEX  project  aims  at  designing  innovative  learning  environments  in  order 
to  support  a  wide  range  of  global  open  learning  activities  within  the  scientific 
domains  of  astronomy,  biodiversity,  chemistry  and  seismology.  This  goal  is 
achieved  by combining  an innovative pedagogical  approach  called  Challenge-Based 
Learning  (CBL)  together  with  the  support  of  a  variety  of  modeling  tools  and 
experimental  scenarios.  CBL can be described  as extended problem-based  learning, 
but  it  contains  also  some  components  from  the  experiential,  project-based  and 
decision-based learning perspectives. 

implement  solutions  for  problems  related 

Project-based  and  problem-based  activities  are  usually  focused  on  a  driving 
question  or  problem  [3].  In  CBL  the  question  or  the  problem  is  replaced  by  a 
challenge.  This  challenge  is  initiated  either by the  COLDEX  project,  a teacher  or a 
student  group.  The  assignments  or "challenges" to be solved might  include ways to 
develop,  design  and 
to  scientific 
phenomena.  A  meaningful  learning  activity  consistent  with  CBL  is  to  present 
learners  with  a  challenge  scenario  and  to  ask  them  to  think  about  a  number  of 
possible  solutions  using  a  variety  of  interactive  tools.  Such  an  activity  serves  to 
centre thinking  around  meaningful  problems  and is typically  effective  in  facilitating 
small-group  collaboration.  Regarding  collaboration,  it is important  that the need  for 
it  is  not  artificially  imposed  on  the  community  of  learners  by  the  system,  but 
grounded in the nature of the task.  Only if collaboration is needed to accomplish the 
task  will  learners  appreciate  the  value  of,  and  seriously  engage  in,  collaborative 
activities  such  as  sharing  information  and  discussing  partial  research  results,  and 
come up with shared decisions and synthetic solutions. 

The rest of the paper is divided into four  sections.  In the next section we present 
related  work  to  the  field  of  science  learning  supported  by  the  use  of  modeling, 
simulations  and  visualization  techniques.  Sections  three  and  four  describe  the 
COLDEX  scenarios  and educational  activities  we have developed  and  implemented. 
Some  examples  of these  activities  are  described  in detail  in  order  to illustrate  these 
ideas.  Finally,  we  conclude  this  paper  by  reflecting  upon  our  experiences  and 
presenting some conclusions. 

Technologies and educational activities for supporting and implementing CBL 

9 

2  Related Work 

The  CoVis  Project  [9]  aims  at  supporting  "Learning  through  Collaborative 
Visualization" that resembles  authentic practices  of science.  It provides  a variety of 
collaboration  and  communication  tools  and  tries  to embed  the  use  of  technology  in 
the  development  of  new  curricula  and  pedagogical  approaches. 
It  focuses  on  a 
project-enhanced  science  learning  pedagogy,  scientific  visualization  tools  for  open 
ended inquiry and networked environments for communication and collaboration. 

For Edelson  [9] authenticity refers  to a learning  context reflecting  the context of 
use.  With respect to this notion of authenticity he characterizes science practice with 
its attitudes of uncertainty  and commitment,  discipline-specific  tools and techniques, 
and  social  interaction.  Uncertainty  refers  to  the  continual  reexamination  of 
techniques  and  results  in  the  pursuit  of  unanswered  questions.  Commitment 
indicates  that  this  pursuit  has  meaningful  ramifications  within  the  value  system  of 
scientists  -  or  students.  The  use  of  historically-refined  tools  and  techniques  also 
provides a shared context facilitating  communication.  And social interaction stresses 
that scientific  work  exceeds  investigation by including  sharing results,  concerns  and 
questions  among  a  community  of  scientists.  "A  vision  of  learning  that  integrates 
these  features  of  scientific  practice  has  students  investigating  open  questions  about 
which they  are genuinely  concerned,  using methods  that parallel  those  of  scientists. 
Throughout  the  process,  they  are  engaged  in  active  interchange  with  others  who 
share their interest." 

A  synthesis  between  discovery  learning  in  science  and  collaborative  learning, 
both supported by computational tools, has recently been suggested by van Joolingen 
[10]. 
Indeed,  there  is  a  variety  of  different  collaborative  activities  in  discovery 
learning  and collaborative  modeling.  BoUen et al  [11] have  identified  the  following 
aspects of computer support in collaborative modeling: 

• 

• 

• 

Several  students  can  share  a  running  model  by  synchronizing  their 
simulation enviroimients. 
The  actual model-building  process  can be  shared  activity  using  a  modeling 
language and annotations in shared workspaces. 
Simulations  are  analyzed  to generate  hypotheses  about the  global  behavior 
of  systems.  To  do  this  in  the  form  of  group  work,  free-hand  sketches  as 
well as argumentation graphs and mathematical tools (function  plots, tables, 
etc.) are useful  tools. 

•  Data  can  be  collected  in  a  distributed  working  mode  with  different 
parameters.  Shared  workspaces  allow  for  gathering  data  from  different 
groups. 

•  Group  work  can  be  supervised  by  sharing  the  environment  with  a  distant 

tutor. 

The  "Cool  Modes"  platform. [12]  supports  these  activities  by  providing  a  uniform 
shared workspace  enviromnent that allows for constructing  and miming models  with 
different  formal  representations  (Petri nets. System Dynamics,  mathematical  graphs 
etc.)  and  also  supports  semi-formal  argumentation  graphs  and  hand-written 

10 

Nelson Baloian, Kay Hoeksema, Ulrich Hoppe and Marcelo Milrad 

annotations.  The  work  reported  in  this  paper  has  been  strongly  inspired  by  these 
developments. 

3  Classroom  Scenarios in the COLDEX  Project 

To  support  educational  classroom  scenarios  according  to  the  Challenge  Based 
Learning  approach  several  so-called  "Digital  Experimentation  Toolkits"  (DExTs) 
have  been  developed  within  the  COLDEX project.  A DExT  includes  experimental 
instructions,  scientific  background  information,  modeling  and  simulation  tools, 
access  to  real  scientific  data,  and  the  formulation  of  initial  challenges.  What  we 
want  to  provide  is  an  open-ended  learning  environment  that  stimulates  learners  to 
identify  and  solve  a  challenge  according  to  the  educational  premises  of  CBL. 
Interactive tools for  modeling and simulation enable learners to generate  and try out 
hypotheses,  and  show the  experimentation  results.  These DExTs  are  intended  to be 
handed  out  to  schools  to be  used  in, but  not  only  in, normal  school  lessons.  They 
provide  iimovative  use of interactive media to enrich the curricula.  Teachers  should 
be  enabled  to  integrate  these  new  resources  easily  in  their  lessons.  As  only  a  few 
teachers have time to spend on courses or time-consuming  studies for learning to use 
these toolkits, they are mostly self-describing  and trouble-free.  DExTs  are not to be 
seen as expert systems which present themselves as authoritative and definitive.  Our 
toolkits  adopt  a more post-modem  position  on the problems  of practice,  celebrating 
difference  and  providing  a  democratic  form  of  interaction  that  allows  the  user  to 
create  and  direct  instead  of  being  directed. 
In  this  sense,  they  are  perhaps  best 
positioned  as  a  means  of  representing  and  sharing  practice,  rather  than  a  way  of 
privately  receiving  advice  on  one's  own  practice  [4].  DExTs  rely  on  tools  for 
modeling  or  simulation  and  experimentation.  The  modeling  tool  is  used  when  the 
students  organise  their thoughts  early in a Project  or when the  students  are going to 
design  something  later  on.  Different  simulation tools  are used  for  testing  estimated 
values and outcomes  concerning different  influences  of events.  Our  experimentation 
tools  are  a  prerequisite  for  the  students  to  construct,  visualize  and  confirm  their 
thoughts  in  the  learning  process.  Essential  for  the  toolkits  is  to  get  access  to 
modeling and collaboration tools, and to a common repository.  This is done through 
the Internet.  A small number of remote sites will be established which generate data. 

Table 1. Challenge-based learning and other learning methods. 

Discoverybased 

Knowledge 
inquiry 

Detective, 
picking up clues 
"As mystery 
writer" 

Problembased 

Knowledge 
construction 

Participant, 
searching 
Coach 

Experiential 
learning 
To grasp and 
transform 
experience 
Active participant, 
choosing 
Facilitator 

Challenge-based 

Knowledge 
interpretation,  inquiry 
and  construction 
Active  constructor/ 
designer 
Coach,  co-experimenter 
and designer 

Cognitive 
focus 

Role of 
student 
Role of 
teacher 

One conclusion within our classroom scenarios according to the CBL is a change 
in the teachers'  and students' roles.  The students' role gets a stronger focus  on being 

Technologies and educational activities for supporting and implementing CBL 

11 

a  more  self-  (or  group-)  regulated  "researcher"  collaborating  by  using  construction 
and  designing  tools.  Due  to  the  open-ended  scientific  nature  of  the  examined 
research  question,  the  teacher's  role  focuses  more  on  being  a  coach  or  coexperimenter.
  Table  1 illustrates  how  CBL  differs  from  some  of the  other  learning 
methods. 

4  Scenario  Examples 

4.1 The Seismo Scenario 

In  this  educational  scenario,  students  learn  how  to  analyse  earthquakes  and  to 
compute  and  understand  some  characteristics  of  the  seismic  phenomena.  For  this 
purpose,  a  network  of  six  seismographs  was  installed  in  different  schools  of  the 
Metropolitan  Region  of Chile.  When an earthquake  occurs, the  computers  attached 
to  the  seismographs  generate  a  file  with  the  seismographic  wave.  Since  every 
seismograph  is  located  in  a  different  place,  they  will  register  different  data.  By 
determining  the  time  difference  between  the  first  (horizontal)  and  the  second 
(vertical)  hit  of  the  earthquake's  wave  registered  by  a  single  seismograph,  the 
students can determine the distance from the seismograph to the hypocenter,  but not 
the direction.  If three or more groups exchange their data and/or results it is possible 
to define  three semi-spheres. 

.?! 

Figure 1: The interface  of the Coolmodes seismography palette. 

12 

Nelson Baloian, Kay Hoeksema, Ulrich Hoppe and Marcelo Milrad 

The  point  where  these  semi-spheres  intersect  each  other  is  the  point  where  the 
epicenter  is  located.  For  enabling  students  to  do  these  calculations  easily,  we 
developed a tool with which they can download the data from a seismograph  (which 
has been previously  uploaded by  the  group  of the  school  where  it is  located),  draw 
the wave  and  calculate  the time difference  between the two hits of the wave, on top 
of the Coolmodes application (see Section 2). 

It  provides  a  working  area  for  this  purpose,  which  is  meant  to  support  the 
workflow  of  the  students'  activities.  A  workflow  is  represented  as  a  network  of 
different 
types  of  nodes,  each  one  implementing  a  further  step  towards  the 
calculation  of the  epicenter.  Figure  1 shows  the palette  with  the  nodes  at  the  right 
and the construction  of the workflow  at the left.  Nodes can be created and placed in 
the working area by "drag-and-drop" from a palette of different  node types. 

r .: 

#.gj^!*«" 

Figure 2: The slide bar of the center's node changes the estimated depth of the hypocenter. 

Adding  an edge between two nodes fransfers output  values  of one node  as input 
values  for  the  successor,  but  of  course, this  is  allowed  by  the  system  only  between 
nodes  where  this  operation  makes  sense.  On  the  node  containing  the  map,  circles 
representing  the  calculated  distance  from  the  sensors  are  drawn  (see  Figure  2).  By 
changing the supposed depth of the earthquake's  genesis location (called  hypocenter) 
the  diameter  of those  circles  also changes.  The point  where  they  all intersect  is the 
location of the epicenter.  This setting allows various kinds of collaborative  learning 
activities. 

4.2 The Moon  Scenario 

Within  our astronomy  scenario the students are enabled to calculate  limar heights by 
using  moon  images  taken  by  themselves  or  refrieved  from  a  repository  via  the 

Technologies and educational activities for supporting and implementing CBL 

13 

internet.  Within  the  COLDEX  project  we  have  access  to  several  different-sized 
telescopes  in  Europe  and  South  America  (Chile).  All  the  telescopes  are  remote 
controllable  and  accessed through web services  so there is no change needed  on the 
client side software  when choosing another telescope.  To calculate lunar heights, the 
students need to be  able to model  calculation networks.  Mathematical  backgrounds 
are the  sentence  of three  and  the  theorems  of  similar  triangles.  In  a  first  step  they 
have  to  discover  the  needed  relationship  between  several  measurements  (crater 
shadow length, distance  crater-terminator,) by using a dynamic 2D-geometry  model. 
After  deciding how to proceed they can take measurements  out of their moon  image 
using  a  special  measurement  tool  (e.g.,  including  zooming)  storing  the  measured 
values  automatically  into  produced  input  nodes  in  the  same  (possibly  network 
shared)  workspace.  The  students  then  can  calculate  the  lunar  heights  by  using  a 
visual  language  to  define  calculation networks.  Fig.  3 shows  the  measurement  tool 
and a calculation network having the taken measurements as inputs. 

Sir../ 

" • • J! 

Figure 3: The lunar heights calculation 

Several competitive or cooperative scenarios using the described environment are 
possible.  Within a collaborative school project "building a moon lexicon" one 
chapter could be about the biggest mares and highest or deepest craters.  Therefore 
tasks could be distributed like: 

developing the needed formula / calculation network 
producing / retrieving moon images (When to take? Which are the best?) 

• 
• 
•  working on different  areas of the moon 

An  example  of  a  competitive  scenario  using  the  described  environment  could  be a 
"moon measuring contesf.  At the beginning of the contest students get access to the 
dynamic  geometry model, to the telescope  image repository  and to the names  of the 
craters  which  are  part  of  the  contest.  Within  a predefined  time  limit  they  have  to 
understand the calculation principle and to measure the heights of the craters as exact 
as possible  to  them.  Therefore  they  could,  e.g.,  use  different  images, process  their 
images  and build  the  averages  out of their results.  The  effectiveness  of  such  group 

14 

Nelson Baloian, Kay Hoeksema, Ulrich Hoppe and Marcelo Milrad 

work  will be  related  too  how  the  students  distribute  the  different  parts  of  the  work 
within  their  groups.  This  could  be  a  focus  of  the  following  discussion.  A  more 
detailed scenario description can be found  at [5]. 

4.3 The Maze  Scenario 

The leading  challenge  within  this scenario is to define  a maximally-general  strategy 
to let a robot escape from a maze.  Although this question has its own history  [6], the 
parallelism to the little (at least partially) autonomous acting robots sent to Mars over 
the  last  years  also  inspired  us  within  COLDEX  to  create  this  scenario.  The  robot 
"senses" its direct neighbourhood (free  or wall in front,  to the right or to the left)  and 
searches  for  a given rule how to behave  in this situation.  A very easy to  implement 
strategy  is  "wall  following",  which  will  not  assure  the  escape  out  of  mazes  with 
"islands".  These  can be  solved  by  more  sophisticated  algorithms  using  additional 
information  (absolute heading).  A special feature  in our scenario is the possibility of 
"reactive programming-by-example".  The robot has to react to the  current  situation 
description.  It starts with an empty memory.  In a situation to which no existing rule 
applies, the user/learner  will be prompted  to enter  a new  action.  Each  user-defined 
reaction will be added to the memory as a rule which will be applied under the same 
circumstances.  Rules can be generalised by replacing concrete elements of situation 
descriptions by jokers which would match any value. 

- r+ 

'*•  -Ml 

f h 

Figure 4 a 

Figure 4b 

The user  will react only by defining  actions in concrete  situations  without having to 
define  global  control  strategies  (local  reactive  programming).  Our  maze  scenario 
consists  of  physical  (wooden  maze,  RCX-driven  Lego  Mindstorms 
robot, 
communication  via  PDA  or  PC,  see  Fig.  4a)  and  virtual  environments  (software 
plug-in  for  our  Cool  Modes  environment  [7],  see  Fig.  4b,  and  a  tiny  PDA 
environment).  Developed rule sets can be stored in and reft-ieved from a local server 
within  a  WLAN.  This  scenario  fits,  e.g.,  for  competitive  group  work  building  a 
maze  the  other  groups'  robots  cannot  deal  with /  developing  rule  sets to be  able  to 

Technologies and educational activities for supporting and implementing CBL 

15 

escape from the  other  groups'  mazes.  A more  detailed  scenario  description  can be 
found  in [8]. 

5  Experience  and  Conclusions 

The  principles,  methodologies  and  tools  described  in  this  paper  have  been 
successfully  used  in real  scenarios  in schools  located  in different  countries.  So  far, 
about 40 teachers  and  200  students haven been involved  in usage  scenarios  ranging 
from  short-term  activities  of  a  few  days  and  longer-term  activities  over  a  whole 
school  year  in  which  COLDEX  DExTs  supported  parts  of  an  integrated  science 
curriculum.  Many of the interesting learning products have been fed  into a common 
repository.  Since  these  learning  products  originate  from  the  same  basic  challenges 
and  since  they  have  been  elaborated  using  the  same  set  of  tools,  it  is  quite 
straightforward  to  exchange  and  share  these  between  different  learning  groups  or 
individuals.  The  COLDEX  repository  is  directly  connected  to  the  Cool  Modes 
learning  environment  supporting  upload  with  automatic  indexing  as  well  as 
similarity-based  retrieval  with  given  examples.  Beyond  the  provision  of  tools  and 
challenges,  this  community  repository  is  another  feature  of  the  COLDEX  approach 
to learning  which has been explained  elsewhere  in more detail  [13].  The  evaluation 
of  the  COLDEX  scenarios  presented  in  this  paper  took  place  in  several  countries 
using  generic  evaluation  instruments  in  order  to  be  able  to  provide  the  same 
evaluation  possibilities  for  all  scenarios.  We  created  a  quantitative  basis  using 
questiormaires  and  analyzed  qualitative  data  eliciting  contextual  and  scenario 
specific  information.  The instruments  were adapted  and tailored to the  collaborative 
and technological  nature  of COLDEX  scenarios.  Different  types of evaluation  were 
conducted in order to assure appropriateness  of the evaluation results.  Based  on the 
results  from  our  evaluation  [14],  the  COLDEX  project  has  been  successful  in 
creating 
innovative  educational  scenarios  and  supporting  authentic  scientific 
activities  mediated  by  advanced  learning  technologies.  These  results provide  some 
indications  that  show  that  students  have  become  more  interested  and  involved  in 
science  learning  when  these  tasks  can  be  supported  by  authentic  scientific  inquiry 
activities,  done  in  collaboration  with  other  peers  and  supported  by  multimodal 
interaction.  The  results  of  the  different  experiences  conducted  within  COLDEX 
have  been  gathered  in  Sweden,  Germany,  Chile  and  Colombia  and  they  can  be 
summarised as  follows: 

• 

• 

• 

Teachers  have  been  able  to  adapt  and  apply  the  tools  to  their  situational  needs 
very  flexibly  and  creatively.  Several  additional  suggestions  and materials  have 
been proposed and elaborated by teachers. 
Students  have  been  able  to  operate  the  tools  with  ease.  Although  this  is  not 
ideal, it has been possible  to work through  the moon  scenario  within half a day 
under  strong  time  constraints.  We  have  seen  many  cases  of  creative  coconstruction 
with high quality results. 
Teachers  have  responded  very  positively  to  the  community  repository  which 
was  only provided  in the  last phase  of the project.  They  clearly  saw the  added 
value of sharing learning results in the nonstandard domains of COLDEX. 

16 

Nelson Baloian, Kay Hoeksema, Ulrich Hoppe and Marcelo Milrad 

Acknowledgments 

This  work  has  been  partially  supported  by  the  European  Community  under  the 
Information  Society  Technologies  (1ST) program  of  the  5th  Framework  Program  for 
RTD  -  Project  COLDEX,  contract  IST-2001-32327.  This  document  does  not 
represent  the  opinion  of  the  European  Community,  and  the  European  Community  is 
not responsible  for  any use  that might be  made  of the  data  appearing  therein. 

References 

1.  Vygotsky,  L.  S.  (1978).  Mind  in  society:  the  development  of  higher  psychological 

processes.  Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 

2.  Bellamy,  R.K.E.  (1996). Designing  Educational  Technology:  Computer-mediated  Change. 
In  B. A. Nardi  (Ed.),  Context and  Consciousness: Activity  Theory and  Human-ComputerInteraction 
 (pp.  123-146). Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press. 

3.  D.H.  Jonassen  (1999).  Designing  Constructivist  Learning  Environments,  Ch.  10  in 
Instructional-Design  Theories and Models: A New Paradigm  of Instructional  Theory, vol. 
II. CM. Reigeluth (ed.) Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 

4.  Beetham,  H 

(2002).  Developing 

through 

shared 
representations  of  practice.  In  Rust,  C  (Ed)  (2002)  Improving  student  learning  through 
learning technologies.  Oxford:  Centre for  Staff and Learning  Development. 

technology  networks 

learning 

5. K.  Hoeksema,  M.  Jansen,  U.  Hoppe:  Interactive  Processing  of Astronomical  Observations 
in a Cooperative  Modelling Environment.  In Proceedings  of IEEE, ICALT 2004. Joensuu, 
Finland. 

6. Abelson, H. and A. diSessa, Turtle Geometry, MIT Press, Cambridge (USA), 1982. 
7.  Pinkwart,  N.  (2003).  A  Plug-In  Architecture  for  Graph  Based  Collaborative  Modeling 

Systems. In: Proc. of AIED 2003, pp. 535-536. Amsterdam, lOS Press. 

8.  M.  Jansen,  M.  Oelinger,  K.  Hoeksema,  U.  Hoppe  (20,04).  An  Interactive  Maze  Scenario 
with  Physical  Robots  and  Other  Smart  Devices.  In:  Proc.  of  WMTE  2004,  Los Alamitos, 
California  (USA), pp 83-90. 

9.  Edelson,  D.C.  (1997).  Realising  Authentic  Science  Learning  through  the  Adaptation  of 
Scientific  Practice. In Tobin, K & Eraser, B. International  Handbook of Science  Education. 
Dordrecht, NL: Kluwer. 

10.  Joolingen,  W.  R.,  van  (2000).  Designing  for  Collaborative  Learning.  In  G.  Gauthier,  C. 
Frasson  & K.  VanLehn  (Eds.)  Intelligent  Tutoring  Systems,  5* Internationa]  Conference, 
Montreal, Canada. Berlin:  Springer. 

11.  Bollen,  L., Hoppe,  H.U.,  Milrad,  M.  & Pinkwart,  N.  (2002).  Collaborative  Modelling  in 
Group  Learning  Environments.  In  Davidsen  et  al.  (eds).  Proceedings  of  the  XX 
International  Conference  of the System Dynamics Society. Palermo (Italy), July 2002. 

12.  Pinkwart,  N.,  Hoppe,  H.  U.  &  GaBner,  K.  (2001).  Integration  of  Domain-Specific 
Elements  into Visual  Language  Based  Collaborative  Environments.  In M  R.  S. Borges,  J. 
M.  Haake  &  H.  U.  Hoppe  (Eds.),  Proceedings  of  the  7'*  International  Workshop  on 
Groupware,  CRIWG 2007.Darmstadt,  Germany, 6-8  September 2001. IEEE CS Press. 

13. Hoppe, H.U., Pinkwart, N., Oelinger, M, Zeini, S., Verdejo, F., Barros, B. & Mayorga, J.I. 
(2005). Building Bridges within  Learning Communities  through  Ontologies and  "Thematic 
Objects".  In  Proceedings  of  the  International  Conference  on  Computer  Supported 
Collaborative Learning  (CSCL2005), Taiwan, June 2005. 

14.  Bjom,  M.,  Karlsson,  M.,  Wichmann,  Astrid.,  Otero,  Nuno.,  Milrad,  Marcelo.,  Oelinger, 
Maria.  &  Hoppe,  Ulrich.  (2005)  'COLDEX,  Final  Evaluation  Report',  in  Information 
Society  Technologies  (1ST)  EU  Program,  Project  No.:  IST-2001-32327,  Deliv.  No. 
D.8.3.1. 

