Enhancing Social Interaction between Older Adults  

and Their Families 

Diego Muñoz, Francisco Gutierrez, Sergio F. Ochoa, and Nelson Baloian 

Computer Science Department, Universidad de Chile 
Av. Blanco Encalada 2120, 3rd Floor, Santiago, Chile 

{dimunoz,frgutier,sochoa,nbaloian}@dcc.uchile.cl 

Abstract.  The  rise  of  Internet  and  ubiquitous  technologies  have  spread  and 
diversified  the  social  media  used  by  people  to  interact  among  them. 
Unfortunately  most  older  adults  are  not  able  to  use  these  solutions.  This 
situation isolates them and negatively affects their physical and mental health. 
Aiming  to  improve  mood  in  older  adults,  and  helping  them  overcome  the 
negative  effects  of  social  isolation,  we  have  developed  a  computer-based 
intermediary system, that we called Social Connector. This system is capable of 
boosting the social interaction between an elder and his/her close relatives; e.g. 
adult  children  and  grandchildren.  The  system  can  also  be  used  as  a  sensor  of 
elders’ social interactions and mood. The preliminary evaluation results indicate 
that  the  system  is  well  accepted  by  older  adults,  and  it  can  be  used  to  boost 
social interactions with their relatives. 

Keywords:  Social 
intelligence, accessibility. 

interaction,  social 

isolation,  older  adults,  ambient 

1 

Introduction 

Today,  social  media  help  people  enhance  and  increase  their  social  interactions. 
Unfortunately,  older  adults  usually  lack  the  required  knowledge  and  technological 
background needed to participate in these platforms. Therefore this evolution of social 
interaction  media  typically  excludes  older  adults  and  socially  isolates  them.  As  an 
example,  according  to  the  2012  census  data  for  Chile  [4],  only  a  28.5%  of  the 
population  over  50  years  old  is  able  to  search  information  in  the  Web,  a  25.6% 
declare to know how to send e-mails, and a 70.5% is not able to perform neither of 
these  tasks.  Moreover,  according  to  Internet  World  Stats  [12],  the  Internet  usage 
penetration in Chile is 59.2%, the second highest one in the region. These values put 
in  evidence  a  generation  gap  in  terms  of  technological  adoption  and  usage,  since 
adults over 50 years old in Chile account for a 28.1% of the country population. 

While elder people prefer social interactions based on telephone, letters and face-
to-face communication, the new generations go towards mobile computing and social 
networking  services.  This  has  caused  the  emergence  of  three  different  generations, 
according  to  their  preferred  social  interaction  mechanisms:  the  digital  natives,  who 
grew up with the Internet-based and mobile technology; the digital immigrants, who 

C. Nugent, A. Coronato, and J. Bravo (Eds.): IWAAL 2013, LNCS 8277, pp. 47–54, 2013. 
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2013 

48 

D. Muñoz et al. 

positively  adopted  these  technologies;  and  the  digital  illiterate,  who  failed  in  this 
adoption,  or  were  not  affected  by  the  introduction  of  these  technologies.  If  we 
consider a typical family, it is quite possible that the older adults are digital illiterate, 
but their grandchildren are digital natives. Figure 1 depicts the evolution of the social 
interaction  channels  of  a  family  community,  during  the  last  years,  based  on  the 
interaction tools preferred by their members. 

 

Fig. 1. Social interaction channels evolution  

 

This technological shift pushes older adults to acquire new knowledge. However, 
elders  are  limited  to  address  that  challenge,  due  that  one  of  the  most  common 
consequences  of  aging  is  the  impairment  of  cognitive  ability.  This  translates  into  a 
reduction of biological and mental capacities, such as visual and auditory perception, 
fine motor control and some aspects of memory and cognition [3, 8]. Therefore, these 
people  need  support  and  guidance  to  face  this  complex  scenario  in  a  pleasant  way 
[15]. Otherwise, the technological adoption by older adults dramatically diminishes. 

The social isolation that affects older adults is mostly due to their low capabilities of 
using  technological  solutions  that  were  not  properly  designed  for  them,  such  as  most 
social networking services and e-mail applications. This phenomenon leads to harmful 
effects on their physical and mental health. In fact, social isolation and low stimulation 
can  be  linked  to  changes  on  hormone  production  in  human  beings  [2],  and  more 
specifically,  a  reduction  on  the  levels  of  DHEA,  a  hormone  used  for  slowing  or 
reversing aging, improving thinking skills in older people, and slowing the progress of 
Alzheimer’s  disease  [13].  Therefore,  it  is  relevant  to  identify  alternative  interaction 
mechanisms  that  can  be  used  by  older  adults,  since  the  social  isolation  can  directly 
impact on their behavior, physical and emotional sensibility, and interpersonal empathy. 
Aiming to improve mood in older adults, and helping them overcome the negative 
effects of social isolation, we developed a computer-based intermediary system, that 
we  called  Social  Connector.  This  system  is  capable  of  boosting  social  interaction 
between older adults and their close relatives. The Social Connector plays two roles: 
(1) to try to reduce the gap between the social interaction scenarios preferred by the 
older adults and digital natives, digital immigrants and other digital illiterate; and (2) 
to  act  as  a  mood  sensor  in  people,  by  triggering  warnings  and  other  notification 
mechanisms  to  alert  and  support  those  in  need.  The  system  takes  advantage  of  the 
sensing devices embedded in computers (particularly in slates) to implement presence 
awareness mechanisms. 

 

Enhancing Social Interaction between Older Adults and Their Families 

49 

Next  section  reports  the  related  work.  Section  3  presents  the  architecture  of  the 
social  connector  and  its  main  components.  Section  4  shows  the  implemented 
prototype and describes the  main use scenarios. Section 5 discusses the preliminary 
results. Section 6 presents the conclusions and further work. 

2 

Related Work 

Cornejo  et  al.  [5]  studied  how  situated  displays  can  provide  ambient  awareness  to 
strengthen  the  family  social  network  of  older  adults.  The  authors  found  that  these 
mechanisms  can  assist  the  integration  of  older  adults  to  their  social  networks,  and 
therefore contribute to enhance asymmetric relations between them and their younger 
relatives.  

Aiming  to  support  intergenerational  social  interactions,  Dianti  et  al.  [6]  designed 
and developed two interconnected applications that provide communication between 
elders  and  young  people  through  a  common  infrastructure.  At  one  side,  the 
application featured a messaging application, developed for smartphones; on the other 
side,  older  adults  used  a  tablet-oriented  application  that  worked  as  a  display  of  all 
received messages and pictures. 

Moser  et  al.  [14]  claim  that  one  problem  for  older  adults,  is  that  information 
systems  often  do  not  allow  feeling  or  sensing  their  communication  partners. 
Therefore, there is a need of designing for enhancing the feeling of belongingness in 
order to gain social presence. 

Kirk et al. [10] showed that home users of video-mediated communication achieve 
a closer connection with their families and friends. However, most video conferencing 
systems  are  designed  for  phone-calls  between  only  two  locations.  Therefore,  using 
them for long interactions or social gatherings with multiple families is cumbersome 
[9].  Ames  et  al.  [1]  concluded  that  older  adults  enjoy  interacting  through 
videoconferencing software, since they could talk with their relatives longer, and get 
to know them better. In fact, one of the greatest rewards perceived by the elderly was 
the aspect of “being there”. 

Kurniawan  and  Zaphiris  [11]  proposed  a  set  of  guidelines  that  can  help  Web 
designers  ensure  accessibility  and  usability  of  Web  pages  for  older  adults.  These 
guidelines include concerns specific to targets, graphics, navigation, browser features, 
content layout design, links, user cognitive design, use of color and background, text 
design,  search  engines,  and  user  feedback  and  support.  Finally,  Wu  and  Van  Slyke 
[16]  studied  the  relationship  between  functionality  and  perceived  usefulness,  and 
between  functionality  and  perceived  ease  of  use,  in  the  case  of  senior,  casual,  and 
novice users. 

3 

Architecture of the Social Connector 

The  Social  Connector  adheres  to  a  client-server  architecture.  The  server  is  used 
mainly  to  provide  persistency  to  the  community  setting  information  and  also  to  the 
data shared by their members. Two client applications interact with the server: one for 

50 

D. Muñoz et al. 

elders (that was designed to run on a slate), and a Web system for adults and young 
people  (Fig.  2).  Both  client  applications  allow  the  exchange  of  public  and  private 
messages among community  members, and also performing  videoconferences  using 
Skype.  However,  the  Web  application  allows  community  managers  to  change  the 
community settings (e.g. to add or remove members, or change users roles). Regular 
users  can  modify  their  own  profile  (e.g.  name  or  picture)  using  the  Web  client 
(through the Family management module). 

 

Fig. 2. Architecture of the Social Connector 

 

The Social Connector  for elders includes a social  sensor that identifies people in 
the  environment  where  the  device  is  installed.  The  sensing  service  is  performed 
through voice analysis in real-time, using the OpenSmile framework [7]. This analysis 
allows  identifying  people,  their  gender  and  some  moods  of  them.  When  the  social 
connector module detects sadness, it sends a private message to people monitoring the 
identified  elder,  indicating  such  a  situation.  This  sensing  service  allows  the  rest  of 
family members both, to detect temporal or permanent anomalous situations that are 
not clearly visible for them, and take action to address these situations early. 
Both client applications use the activity monitor to record the user interactions in a log 
file, which can be accessed and analyzed by the community managers using the Web 
client.  An  information  exchange  module  is  used  to  keep  the  coherence  between  the 
shared information available in both, server and client applications. The server keeps 
in different repositories information about different components (i.e. social activities, 
family management, public/private messages and videoconferences). 

4 

Services for Elders 

The user interface of the Social Connector is simple (Fig. 3a), in order to help elders 
understand  it  and  help  themselves  feel  comfortable  with  it.  The  available  services 

 

Enhancing Social Interaction between Older Adults and Their Families 

51 

allow  users  to  perform  videoconferences,  and  send/receive  private  or  public 
messages. The slate running the system was installed on a wall (Fig.3b), and it was 
kept  connected  at  all  times  to  the  electrical  network  and  Internet.  This  avoids  that 
elder people have to be aware of connection issues.  
 

(a) 

(b) 

Fig. 3. Implementation of the Social Connector 

 

The  elders  use  their  voice  to  communicate  with  other  family  members,  and  use 
their  hands  only  to  select  the  service  to  be  used.  After  using  a  service,  the  system 
automatically detects inactivity and presents (by default) the main user interface. This 
mechanism  avoids  that  elders  have  to  deal  with  the  regular  windows  used  in  most 
software applications. 

The  videoconference  module  was  implemented  using  the  Skype  API.  Fig.  4a 
shows the list of contacts that is visible to the elders. This service allows other family 
members  to  call  them  using  the  regular  Skype  system,  which  typically  eases  the 
interaction because the communication tool does not represent an obstacle for them. 
Usually,  the  rest  of  the  family  prefers  to  use  their  regular  interaction  supporting 
systems (e.g. email, Skype, Facebook) to communicate with other relatives, instead of 
using a proprietary system where they have to log in to interact with the others. This 
aspect of the system, i.e. the usability for adults and young people, was identified as a 
key  design  issue  during  the  system  evaluation.  Therefore  it  has  been  partially 
addressed in the current version of the Social Connector.   

 

 (a) 

 (b) 

Fig. 4. User interfaces of the Social Connector 

 

 (c) 

Following the same idea, the private messages have been implemented as e-mails, 
which allow family members to use regular email systems to deliver these messages 
to  elders.  A  filter  embedded  in  the  private  messages  component  shows  on  the 

52 

D. Muñoz et al. 

interface only the messages of the family members. Fig. 4b shows the user interface 
in  which  the  elders  visualize  these  messages.  Elders  respond  to  private  messages 
using the voice (Fig. 4c). A speech-to-text translator converts the voice message and 
shows it on the screen. If the user agrees, the  message is  sent (as a regular e-mail). 
Otherwise,  a  new  message  response  can  be  recorded,  or  the  user  can  decide  to  not 
respond to the message. 

5 

Preliminary Results 

In  order  to  obtain  preliminary  information  about  the  acceptance  of  the  system,  we 
installed it at the living room of a house where three elderly people live, one male and 
two  females  aged  76,  74  and  70  years  old  respectively.  All  of  them  are  digital 
illiterate. They used the system for three days in order to communicate with their sons 
(digital  immigrants,  aged  54,  47,  46  and  39  years  old)  and  grandchildren  (digital 
natives, aged 22, 21, 16, 13). Since the goal of this activity was just to have some first 
impressions about how the  users  would react to the system,  we did not prepare any 
formal experiment.  

After that period, we conducted three focus groups: one for each group (i.e. elders, 
adults and young people). All of them considered the application usable and useful, 
however they also indicated some limitations that allow us to understand some social 
interaction patterns between these groups.  

The focus group addressed three hypothetical situations: Suppose you have to send 
a  message  to  another  person,  how  often  would  you  do  it  if: (1) the  message can be 
sent  by  e-mail  or  through  a  Facebook  message  (the  alternative  you  prefer);  (2)  the 
message  can  be  sent  through  a  Web page  in  which  you  must  enter  a  username  and 
password;  (3)  the  message  can  be  sent  through  a  system  where  you  dictate  the 
message to the computer (i.e. you talk to the computer). For each situation, the answer 
options  were:  a.  always,  b.  occasionally, or  c.  rarely  or  never. Table 1 presents the 
answers,  indicating  for  each  situation  the  type  of  response  that  was  obtained  (i.e. 
options “a”, “b” or “c”).  

Table 1: Results of the survey 

   
Young  
Adults  
Elders 

1.a 
4/4 
4/4 
1/4 

1.b 
- 
- 
- 

1.c 
- 
- 
3/4 

2.a 
- 
-  
- 

2.b 
2/4 
1/4  
- 

2.c 
2/4 
3/4 
- 

3.a 
2/4 
 - 
4/4 

3.b 
1/4 
1/4  
- 

3.c 
1/4 
3/4 
- 

  

Concerning  the  use  of  e-mails  or  Facebook  messages  (i.e.  the  first  hypothetical 
situation), young people and adults feel comfortable with it, but the elders not. Only 
one elder knew how to send e-mails. Concerning the use of a Web system to interact 
with others, it was not a good option for young people and particularly for elders. In 
the case of the adults, they mentioned that they would use it only if the person to be 
contacted is affectively very close to them (e.g. their parents or children). Concerning 

 

Enhancing Social Interaction between Older Adults and Their Families 

53 

the use of voice to support these interactions, it seems to be quite suitable for young 
people,  but  mainly  for  elders.  The  adults’  opinion  was  similar  to  the  previous 
situation; i.e. they would use the system if the person to be contacted were very close.  
Although  these  results  are  still  preliminary,  they  indicate  that  the  three  groups 
would prefer to use different interactions tools, and the adults are the only ones that 
are willing to use a tool that they consider to not being suitable for them, in the case 
they  have  an  important  emotional  tie  towards  the  other.  Young  people  prefer 
interaction  tools  that  are  natural  to  them,  and  the  elders  mentioned  that  they  want 
simple solutions. One of them mentioned: "at this point you do not want to complicate 
your  life".  These  preliminary  results  represent  an  important  insight  to  rethink  the 
design of the interaction paradigms considered in the Social Connector; particularly 
the support for interactions used by young and adults. 

Finally, a last question was done to the participants during the focus group: Would 
you like that the system inform you when a family member is depressed or sad? All of 
them answered “yes” and would be eager to count on such a service. This means the 
Social  Connector  has  an  interesting  chance  to  act  as  an  emotional  sensor  of  people 
(particularly  elders),  and  thus  enhance  the  social  activity  and  tie  the  links  among 
members of a familiar network. 

6 

Conclusions and Future Work 

This  article  presents  a  system  that  was  initially  designed  to  help  reduce  the  social 
isolation experienced by elder people, due to the lack of knowledge to use Internetbased 
 interaction  tools.  After  a  first  evaluation  round,  we  identified  that  the  system 
can also be used to monitor elders’ mood (through a social sensor), and also support 
interactions among other family members.  

Because  of  the  gap  that  exists  between  the  interaction  tools  preferred  by  young, 
adults  and  elder  people,  the  system  provides  some  mechanisms  to  address  it. 
However, more research and evaluation is required to make a definitive proposal. 

The  Social  Connector  was  evaluated  by  elders,  adults  and  young  people,  all 
members of a family community. The participants found the system to be usable and 
useful,  and  the  weaknesses  that  they  identified  are  related  to  mitigating  the  already 
mentioned  gap.  In  the  focus  groups  conducted  after  the  evaluation  process,  several 
participants mentioned that they would like that the system allows them to interact in 
an ubiquitous  way; i.e. that every  member  uses the system that is  more suitable  for 
him/her, which is clearly the next step in this research. 

Concerning  the  social  sensor  included  in  the  solution,  all  the  participants  were 
eager  to  user  the  system  and  were  very  enthusiastic  to  count  on  that  service, 
particularly  when  monitoring  elders  that  do  not  have  a  caregiver.  The  social 
interactions  carried  during  the  evaluation  process  did  not  require  the  triggering  of 
alarms  indicating  sadness  of  any  elder;  therefore,  the  social  sensor  service  was  not 
visible for the participants in the process. 

Although  this  is  a  first  step  in  this  research  initiative,  these  preliminary  results 
allow us to expect a positive impact of the Social Connector on the elders’ mood, the 

54 

D. Muñoz et al. 

monitoring capability in these people, and the interactions among family community 
members. 

 

Acknowledgments.  This  work  has  been  supported  by  Fondecyt  (Chile),  Grant  Nº 
1120207. The work of Francisco Gutierrez has been supported by the Conicyt (Chile) 
Ph.D. scholarship. 

References 

1.  Ames, M.G., Go, J., Kaye, J., Spasojevic, M.: Making Love in the Network Closet: The 
Benefits and Work of Family Videochat. In: Proc. of CSCW 2010, Savannah, USA (2010) 
2.  Arnetz,  B.,  Theorell,  T.,  Levi,  L.,  Kallner,  A.,  Eneroth,  P.:  An  Experimental  Study  of 
Isolation  of  Elderly  People:  Psychoendocrine  and  Metabollic  Effects. 

Social 
Psychosomatic Medicine 45(4), 395–406 (1983) 

3.  Carmichael, A.: Style Guide for the Design of Interactive Television Services for Elderly 

Viewers, Independent Television Commission, Winchester, United Kingdom (1999) 

4.  Chile 2012 Census, http://www.censo.cl (last visit: September 15, 2013)  
5.  Cornejo, R., Tentori, M., Favela, J.: Ambient Awareness to Strengthen the Family Social 

Network of Older Adults. Computer Supported Cooperative Work 22, 309–344 (2013) 

6.  Dianti,  M., Parra,  C.,  Casati,  F.,  De  Angelli,  A.:  What’s  Up:  Fostering  Intergenerational 

Social Interactions. In: Proc. of the FoSIBLE 2012, Marseille, France (2012) 

7.  Eyben, F., Weninger, F., Woellmer, M., Schuller, B.: OpenSMILE: The Munich Versatile 

and Fast Open-Source Audio Feature Extractor,  
http://opensmile.sourceforge.net (last visit: September 15, 2013) 

8.  Hawthorn,  D.:  Possible  Implications  of  Aging  for  Interface  Designers.  Interacting  with 

Computers 12, 151–156 (2000) 

9.  Judge, T.K., Neustaedter, C., Harrison, S., Blose, A.: Family Portals: Connecting Families 

Through a Multifamily Media Space. In: Proc. CHI 2011, Vancouver, Canada (2011) 

10.  Kirk,  D.,  Sellen,  A.,  Cao,  X.:  Home  Video  Communication:  Mediating  ‘Closeness’.  In: 

Proc. of CSCW 2010, Savannah, United States (2010) 

11.  Kurniawan, S., Zaphiris, P.: Research-Derived Web Design Guidelines for Older People. 

In: Proc. ASSETS 2005, Baltimore, USA (2005) 

12.  Latin  American  Internet  and  Facebook  Population  –  Telecommunications  Statistics, 
http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats10.htm  (last  visited:  September 
15, 2013) 

13.  MedlinePlus, 

http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/druginfo/natural/ 

331.html (last visit: September 15, 2013) 

14.  Moser,  C.,  Fuchsberger,  V.,  Neureiter,  K.,  Sellner,  W.,  Tscheligi,  M.:  Elderly’s  Social 
Presence  supported  by  ICTs  –  Investigating  User  Requirements  for  Social  Presence.  In: 
Proc. of SocialCom 2011, Boston, USA (2011) 

15.  Roupa, Z., Nikas, M., Gerasimou, E., Zafeiri, V., Giasyrani, L., Kazitori, E., Sotiropoulou, 

P.: The Use of Technology by the Elderly. Health Science J. 4(2), 118–126 (2010) 

16.  Wu, Y., Van Slyke, C.: Interface Complexity and Elderly Users: Revisited. In: Proc. of the 

SAIS 2005, Savannah, United States (2005) 

