Supporting Collaboration for Smarter City Planning 

Jonathan Frez1, Nelson Baloian2, and Gustavo Zurita3 

1 School of Informatics and Telecommunication Engineering, Universidad Diego Portales, 

Manuel Rodriguez Sur 415, RM, Santiago, Chile 

2 Department of Computer Science, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile 

3 Information Systems and Management Dept., Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile 

Abstract. Computer-based collaborative tools have been proven to be effective 
in supporting inhabitants of cities to participate more activeley in the decisions 
about the development of their cities and environment. These tools are also help 
them to organize themselfs and react  more quickly to changes in the environment 
enabling at the same time the broad participation of its population in the 
decisions about its development. An example of this situation is triggered by a 
new law recently issued in Chile which aims to give its population an opportunity 
to participate in the decision about whether a new mobile communication 
antenna should be placed in their neighborhood and under which circumstances. 
This  works  proposes  a  new  example  of  such  a  tool  which  allows  citizens  to 
gather and display the relevant information for such circumstances. 

Keywords: Smart cities, urban planning, Collaborative computing. 

1 

Introduction 

Global population is  growing fast and  mega cities are appearing all over the  world. 
These  cities  are  facing  day  by  day  the  complex  task  of  offering  various  services  
without interruption to millions of people [1]. However, in order to manage the often 
limited resources they count on to accomplish their duties it is necessary to them to 
interact  with  each  other  and  exchange  information  [2]. This  is  especially  true  when 
they have to manage resources such as properties, installations, vehicles and any other 
resources which may vary their locations when they are on duty. In such cases they 
face  the  problem  of  managing  geo-located  resources,  which  has  to  be  solved  by  
various actors.  

In the past, some systems supporting decision making processes have been developed 
 for  Wind  Farm  Sites  [3],  Water  Resource  management  [4]  and  Urban  Design 
[5].  However,  they  have  been  developed  to  support  a  specific  entity  using  data  
generated exclusively inside one organization without having the possibility of using 
important  information  generated  by  other  entities,  nor  sharing  the  own  data  with  
others.  In  order  to  design  a  proper  platform  to  support  the  complex  process  of  
decision  making  in  a  “mega  cities”  scenario  it  is  necessary  to  consider  that  entities 
interacting with each other when offering their services are of various areas, each one 
having  its  particular  perspective  of  the  problem  and  hence  they  might  consider  a  
different solution to the problem[6]. 

J. Bravo, D. López-de-Ipiña, and F. Moya (Eds.): UCAmI 2012, LNCS 7656, pp. 338–341, 2012. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012 

 

Supporting Collaboration for Smarter City Planning 

339 

Recently,  in  Chile  a  law  was  issued  regulating  the  installation  of  antennas  for  
mobile phone communication. This law particularly restricts the location and height 
of the antenna according to the context of the surroundings where it will be installed. 
It also requires the company to make some urban developing works which should be 
approved by the people living in the area. 

The process of installing an antenna tower starts involving four governments and 
two the company wishing to install the antenna tower apply for the required permits 
to  the  local  public  work  agency,  the  telecommunications  regulatory  authority,  the 
ministry of Housing and Urban Development and the company’s representative also 
notifies the affected neighbors. From the moment the citizens’ and their organization 
are notified, they have 30 days to analyze it. The project includes a presentation of the 
characteristics of the antenna tower and the proposed urban improvement works. The 
discussion process is carried out by the neighborhood residents’ committee, the people 
living in the area affected by the improvement works, and the local public work 
agency. The results of the discussion might be a complete acceptance to the proposed 
project, a proposal modifying the work plan for urban improvements or a rejection of 
the  project  due  to  non-compliance  the  technical  requirements.  Beside  the  technical 
requirements there are some other regarding the surrounding environment encompassing 
 a  certain  distance  from  the  tower:  a)  neighbors  living  in  a  circle  with  a  radius 
equal to two times the height of the tower location must be notified, b) there should be 
no  nurseries,  kindergartens,  schools,  hospitals  or  any  other  health  caring  facilities 
inside a circle with radius four times the antenna’s height, c) there must be only one 
antenna  inside  a  circle  with  a  radius  equal  to  100  meters,  d)  the  affected  neighbors 
may require urban improvement works inside an area defined by a circle with radius 
equal to 250 meters. As we see, the entities checking the project have to answer two 
questions:  Q1)  Does  the  installation  complies  with  the  distance  requirements?  Q2) 
which  are  the  urban  development  works  are  going  to  be  required.  Since  these  two 
questions must be answered in a period of 30 days’ time, a tool supporting the analysis 
of the situation as well as the decision process in a collaborative and rational way 
becomes highly necessary. 

2 

Platform Description 

The collaborative process can be divided in activities having direct relation with the 
answers the proposed questions. These were identified as follows: 
 

A.1 Definition of the radios and the affected neighborhood. 
A.2 Empirical checking of the distance requirements. 
A.3 Presentation of the urban improvement Works proposed by the company  
A.4 Counter-proposal of urban improvements. 
A.5 Open discussion of the urban improvement alternatives, generating a list 

of the most important ones. 

A.6 Priorization of the improvement works, done by the public work agency. 

 

340 

J. Frez, N. Baloian, and G. Zurita 

In order to manage these activities efficiently we used a software platform for developing 
geo-collaborative application supporting decision making, over which the tool 
presented in this work was implemented [7]. This platform allows the management of 
multiple  projects  categorizing  them  in  the  typical  discussion  steps:  brainstorming, 
planning and execution. Moreover, it allows the management of workspaces associated 
to geographical areas including space-time metrics, including ichnographic information;
  tools  for  collecting  information  from  various  sources,  as  well  incorporating 
autonomous  agents  in  order  to  perform  simulations  and  analysis  over  the  physical 
area represented by a map. This tool has been extended in order to include an autonomous 
 agent  specialized  in  representing  transmission  antennas.  When  one  of  these 
agents is located on a certain location over a map (by drag and drop) the tool created 
two working spaces, which will be used by the public work agency and the affected 
neighbors for working collaboratively. 

The  generated  workspaces  are  accessible  via  an  URL,  each  one  helps  users  to  
answer each one of the questions presented in the previous section. The first one is 
related to the question wheatear the requirements about distances have been fulfilled 
(Q1).  In  order  to  help  answer  this  question  the  workspace  displays  a  view  with  the 
map of the area in being analyzed (where the antenna was located by drag and drop) 
showing in a simple way all circles corresponding to the restrictions and urban issues 
imposed by the law, considering the position and height of the tower (see Figure 1). 
 

 

Fig.  1.  Red  circles  are  to  sensitive  zones  like  schools  and  health  caring  facilities;  The  green 
circle  is  the  urban  improvement  zone;  the  black  circle  is  the  zone  of  affected  neighbors;  the 
blue circle is the zone where only one antenna can be placed 

As we can see in figure 5 this first view supports the performance of activities A2, 
A2 by providing a clear picture of the situation. It also displays a link to the second 
view which supports the revision of the proposals for urban improvement works and 
provides a link to the project proposal A3. The second space is oriented to answer the 
second question (Q2) which refers to the revision of the urban improvement work. 

This view is oriented on provide a participatory discussion for urban improvements 
(A4,  A5  and  A6);  any  user  can  add  a  title,  description,  image  and  an  estimate  
cost. These proposals can be voted and commented using social network integration 
(Facebook and Twitter). 

 

Supporting Collaboration for Smarter City Planning 

341 

Fig. 2. Second question view. Left size: Urban improvements votes system; Right: allows adding 
an urban improvement proposal by clicking on the location. 

 

3 

Conclusion 

This works aims to make a contribution to the development of smarter cities by allowing 
their inhabitants to actively participate in the decisions about its development. The 
need of this tool was triggered by a new law issued in Santiago de Chile which allows 
citizens  to  participate  in  the  decision  making  process  about  granting  permission  for 
erecting an antenna tower in their neighborhood. Since the time given by this law for 
discussing  the  proposal  presented  by  the  company  is  rather  short,  it  is  necessary  to 
count with a tool which facilitates this process. We developed such a tool on top an 
existing platform for supporting the construction of systems for geo-referenced decision 
 making.  The  tool  easies  and  speeds  up  this  process  by  presenting  the  relevant 
information in such a way that efficient and effective decisions are easier to make.  

References 

[1]  Juan, Y.K., Wang, L., Wang, J., Leckie, J., Li, K.M.: A decision-support system for smarter 
city planning and management. IBM Journal of Research and Development 55(1.2), 3 (2011) 
[2]  Huestis, E.M., Snowdon, J.L.: Complexity of legacy city resource management and value modeling 
of interagency response. IBM Journal of Research and Development 55(1.2), 1:1–1:12  

[3]  Simão,  A.,  Densham,  P.,  Haklay,  M.:  Web-based  GIS  for  Collaborative  Planning  and  
Public Participation: An Application to the Strategic Planning of Wind Farm Sites. Journal 
of Environmental Management 90(6), 2027–2040 (2009) 

[4]  Nyerges,  T.,  Jankowski,  P.,  Tuthill,  D.,  Ramsey,  K.:  Collaborative  Water  Resource  
Decision Support: Results of a Field Experimen. Annals of the Association of American 
Geographers 96(4), 699–725 (2006) 

[5]  Ligtenberg, A., de Vries, B., Vreenegoor, R.C.P., Bulens, J.D.: SimLandScape, a sketching 

tool for collaborative spatial planning. Urban Design International 16, 7–18 (2011) 

[6]  Armstrong,  M.P.,  Densham,  P.:  Cartographic  support  for  collaborative  spatial  decisionmaking.
 AUTOCARTO-CONFERENCE, pp. 49–58 (1995) 

[7]  Frez, J., Baloian, N., Zurita, G.: Software Platform to build geo-collaborative Systems supporting 
design and planning. In: Proceedings of the CSCWD Conference, Wuhan, China (2012) 

