Evaluating a Prototype for Geo-referenced Collaborative 

Psychotherapy with Mobile Devices  

Luís Carriço1, Gustavo Zurita2, Marco de Sá1, Nelson Baloian3,  

João Faria4, and Isabel Sá4 

1 Department of Informatics, University of Lisbon, Portugal 

{lmc,marcosa}@di.fc.ul.pt 

2 Department of Management Control and Information Systems, Universidad de Chile, Chile 

gzurita@fen.uchile.cl 

3 Department of Computer Science, Universidad de Chile 

nbaloian@gmail.com 

4 Faculty of Psychology, University of Lisbon, Portugal 
jnunofaria@gmail.com, mirealsa@fp.ul.pt 

Abstract.  Social  competency  training,  as  part  of  psychotherapy,  for  children 
and teenagers, requires them to engage on outdoor activities in which they have 
to complete tasks such as talking to someone or visiting a specific place. Currently,
 the inability for therapists to monitor their patients, to promote collaborative 
efforts and to reinforce positive attitudes is a major issue that affects both 
the therapy process and its results.  In this paper we present an evaluation experience 
 of  a  mobile  prototype  for  a  geo-referenced  collaborative  system  that 
supports in-situ group therapy. The system aims to provide means for therapists 
to  monitor  their  patients,  their  locations  and  achievements  and  includes  
communication  mechanisms  that  facilitate  cooperation  between  patients  and 
therapist.  We  describe  the  concept  behind  the  project,  our  initial  low-fidelity 
prototypes  and  the  experiments  that  were  undertaken  to  validate  them.  Initial 
results are discussed and future work is defined. 

Keywords: Prototyping, Collaborative Psychotherapy, Geo-referenced systems. 

1   Introduction 

Social competencies and skills training (SCST) is a type of psychotherapy procedure 
in  which  patients  are  generally  required  to  perform  a  set  of  activities  individually 
(e.g., ask for a coffee at a bar; compliment someone on the street) or as a group (e.g., 
talk to each other; work as a team) [1, 2], working both with their peers and parents 
[3]. This kind of therapy is rather frequent and applied to people who feel uncomfortable 
 when  faced  with  traditionally  common  social  situations,  in  some  cases,  to  the 
point of impairing their daily lives [4].This type of issue affects all ages, genders and 
cultures, being, however, most noticeable, but also more likely to be easily treatable, 
at  younger  ages.  More  severe  cases,  such  as  Autism  and  Asperger’s  Syndrome,  are 
also common examples of disorders with similar symptoms [1].  

G. Kolfschoten, T. Herrmann, and S. Lukosch (Eds.): CRIWG 2010, LNCS 6257, pp. 353–362, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 

354 

L. Carriço et al. 

Currently, this process is generally synchronous. During a consultation, therapists 
prescribe  a  set  of  field  tasks  for  their  patients,  that  are  perform  at  home  (with  their 
parents)  or  at  school  (with  their  peers).  Tasks,  although  accomplished  individually, 
are  preferably  undertaken  within  the  context  of  a  group,  so  that  motivation  is  kept 
even when the therapist’s presence is inaccessible. SCST tasks are usually defined as 
a set of consecutive activities that  should be accomplished by  following a predetermined 
route. At each specific place a task or task repetition is proposed. Every time 
the patient is able to complete it, he/she annotates his/her thoughts and registers a set 
of values for feelings such as shyness, stress, anxiety, and difficulty.  

These  annotations  are  afterwards  shared  with  their  therapist  during  a  following 
consultation, in  which the experience is discussed and  feelings are explained. Paper 
questionnaires and annotations are used to collect this information while on the field 
and to support the exchange of information with the therapist. Sometimes these consultations 
are held in group, with other patients having similar behaviors, discussing 
the  achievements  of  each  other,  congratulating  them  on  the  successful  accomplishments 
and encouraging them to surpass the felt difficulties. 

Given the used medium, this process is affected by several drawbacks. Firstly, as 
there is only intermittent therapist supervision, patients are frequently detached from 
the therapy process and provide, more often than desired, fake comments and experiences.
  Additionally,  cooperation  between  the  various  actors  during  the  execution  of 
the tasks is hindered by the usual lack of communication and social skills: motivation 
is extremely low while away from the therapist’s office, whenever parental supervision 
is unavailable and, especially, when cooperation between patients is not possible 
or sometimes avoided.  

In this paper we present an evaluation experience that aimed at assessing the feasibility,
 adequateness and acceptance of a geo-referenced collaborative mobile tool to 
support SCST. We discuss the design process and present the initial prototypes that 
emerged, also stressing the  validation process that  was conducted and the initial results 
that were encountered. Future directions and improvements are also detailed. 

2   Related Work 

Recent  studies  have  shown  that  the  use  of  technology,  applied  to  psychotherapy,  can 
improve  clinicians’  work  [5,  6].  In  particular,  mobile  device  usage  has  been  gaining 
popularity and several tools have emerged recently [7, 8]. Most of them use handheld 
devices such as PDAs or Tablet-PCs for self-control or relaxation procedures [9].Work 
reporting  on  mobile  devices  used  to  support  healthcare  range  from  theoretical  approaches,
  establishing  design  patterns  based  on  the  needs  of  the  person  being  treated 
(mental  health [10]), to the development and testing of prototypes of  monitoring  systems.
  Among  the  various  applications  developed  we  can  find  system  to:  monitor  the 
heath condition of people with chronic asthma [11, 12]; monitor and recommend behaviors 
during physical activity [13]; monitor and guide people with mental disorders [14]; 
and aid on the recovery of addiction problems [14]. Other works use sensors to collect 
data about the physical and mental condition of people with severe chronic diseases like 
Alzheimer [15] and bipolar mental disorders [16]. The prototype described in [17] addresses 
the treatment of depression though a cognitive behavior therapy approach based 

 

Evaluating a Prototype for Geo-referenced Collaborative Psychotherapy 

355 

on a proposed ontology. In recurs to a set of tools supporting communication through 
chats,  audio  conversations  and  messaging  services  that  allows  a  group  of  distributed 
located specialists to make a collaborative diagnostic.  

Still,  cooperation  and  support  for  group  activities  is  such  settings  is  still  very 
scarce. In other domains, there are some systems addressing similar issues usually in a 
generic manner. Related projects have addressed the need to support communication 
between several hand-held and even non-mobile devices [18, 19]. Managing information 
that is  shared between several devices is the  usual  goal of a system  supporting 
cooperative work in a spatially distributed environment. However, the specificity of 
the group therapy  scenario requires a special care. In such domains, significant emphasis 
 should  be  devoted  to  the  easiness  of  use,  the  adequacy  to  the  clinical  procedures,
 and the specificity of the used artifacts [20]. In addition, and most importantly, 
for  SCST,  it  is  essential  to  allow  therapists  to  maintain  awareness  of  their  patients’ 
locations and activities, not only in order to supervise the process but also to be able 
to intervene whenever necessary.  

3   Background and Design Process 

This  project  emerged  as  the  conjunction  of  two  different  systems  with  distinct  purposes.
 The first one aims at supporting geo-collaborative work and knowledge creation,
 supporting geo-referenced annotations (in various formats) that can be monitored 
and shared in real time through mobile devices [21]. The goals  of the second project 
are  to  support  cognitive  behavioral  therapy  practices  by  providing  means  for  therapists 
 and  patients  to  complete  their  activities  (e.g.,  thought  and  feeling  registration) 
ubiquitously, also using mobile devices [22].  

During the course of some trials with the psychotherapy tool in group settings [20], 
in which several therapists were involved, their need for means to manage out-of-theoffice 
 sessions  and  monitor  their  patients  while  completing  activities  outdoors  was 
noticed  and  frequently  mentioned.  Accordingly,  the  idea  to  combine  these  existing 
systems,  which  allow  therapists  to  share  a  set  of  data  collection  artifacts  with  their 
patients, into a system that could provide awareness on the location of various users 
and communicate  with them  in real time,  was quickly and enthusiastically accepted 
by all the involved therapists. 

3.1   System’s Goals 

Based on the needs that SCST therapists claimed, the system aims at addressing several 
 issues  and  enhancing  the  process  by:  (1)  providing  an  integrated  collaborative 
platform for both therapists and patients; (2) supporting real time, monitoring of patients 
 while  accomplishing  their  tasks;  (3)  offering  communication  mechanisms  between 
all participants; (4) including multimodal experience records and (5) promoting 
collaborative motivation between patients and therapist.  

This can be achieved by merging a set of geo-referenced collaborative features, inherited 
from the first project with enhanced therapy artifacts that support in-situ multimodal 
 data  collection  and  reviewing  mechanisms,  offered  by  the  second.  Overall, 
this  results  in  a  system  that,  on  the  one  hand,  allows  users  (patients)  to  access  and 
create data (e.g., video/audio/text annotations) that is geo-referenced, using a digital 

356 

L. Carriço et al. 

map, directly on their mobile devices (e.g., smartphone, PDA) and; on the other hand, 
a power-user (the therapist) to manage all the information that is generated, access all 
the users’ locations, manage, and distribute it through the various participants. 

3.2   System’s Features 

Geo-Referenced Knowledge Creation. On a general perspective, the geo-referenced 
knowledge  creation  system  provides  mechanisms  for  users  to  create  geo-referenced 
information,  by  selecting  a  location  on  a  map  and  creating  structured  annotations, 
either textual or sketch-based [21]. The system also includes an underlying communication 
mechanism that creates an ad-hoc network between the various mobile devices. 
With this mechanism, generated information can be distributed between several users, 
who can browse through the existing information by its location, directly on a map.  

 

Multi-modal  Psychotherapy  Data  Collection.  The  psychotherapy  framework  includes 
a set of functionalities that allow therapists to create patient-specific artifacts 
that support data collection using various modalities (e.g., voice, video, images, text) 
[22]. Each artifact can be used on a mobile device. Results, together with usage logs, 
are locally stored in XML files and can be synchronized to other devices.   

3.3   Design Approach  

The  design  of  the  system  is  following  a  User  Centred  approach  [23],  in  which  the 
various  stages  have been closely accompanied by end-user and their input has been 
provided since the beginning. As a bootstrap, several meetings were held, with therapists 
and members from the two projects, spawning the system that is being designed. 
Requirements  were  set  based  on  the  existing  features,  the  therapists’  requests  and 
description of patients’ needs. Some scenarios were also defined and simulations took 
place to identify additional issues and requirements for the envisioned activities.  

These requirements were thoroughly discussed with practicing therapists and psychotherapy 
researchers and, once consensus was achieved, the design concept evolved 
into the prototyping stage. 

3.4   Prototypes 

To  test  the  concept,  two  different  low-fidelity  prototypes  were  created.  One  for  the 
therapist application, designed for a Tablet-PC and one for the patients’ tool, directed 
to  smart-phones.  The  creation  process  of  these  prototypes  followed  an  advanced 
methodology, specifically conceived to support mobile interaction design [23]. 

Figure  1a  shows  two  sketches  for  the  patient  application.  On  the  left,  the  main 
screen depicts the main user interface, in which patients can keep track of their tasks 
and location of their route, as defined by the therapist. Below, there’s a quick navigation 
menu that allows patients to quickly select a media capturing option or create an 
annotation.  On  the  right,  the  second  screen  displays  the  various  media  options.  Patients 
can quickly take a photo, record a video or record an audio annotation or sound 
and immediately send it to the therapist. If allowed by the therapist, the other patients 
on that session will receive the message as well. Broadcasting should always be confirmed 
by the therapist depending on his/her assessment on whether it will contribute 
or not to the encouragement of the other patients. 

 

Evaluating a Prototype for Geo-referenced Collaborative Psychotherapy 

357 

a) Patients’ PDA tool 

b) Therapist’s Tablet-PC tool 

 

Fig. 1. Low-fidelity prototypes 

Figures  1b  shows  the  therapist’s  counterpart.  On  the  main  canvas,  the  figure  presents  the 
messaging textbox, in which messages can be read, composed, and recipients can be added or 
removed  by  (de)selecting  their  photos  (left-bottom  corner  above the  menu).  The  lower  menu 
allows the therapist to manage the patients, to send global messages, directly to all the patients, 
and defined the general settings of the session. On the right side of the canvas, individual information 
on each participant is always available, including completed tasks, feelings and their 
intensity, and current progress. Additionally, shortcuts for each patient’s data (e.g., annotations, 
photos) are available, together with individual messaging options. 

In figure 2a it is visible the main canvas when the manage patients’ option is selected. Here, 
the therapist is able to monitor patient’s locations and movement as well as set new challenges 
and tasks that are automatically updated on the patient’s route. Figure 2b depicts the therapist 
user  interface’s  main  screen,  displaying  a  map  in  which  therapists  can  manage  the  various 
locations of the pre-defined challenges, as well as their patients’ positions and movement. 

a) Low-fi in out-of-the-lab experiment 

b) Screenshot of the developed application 

       

 

4   Experiment 

Fig. 2. Therapist’s Tablet-PC tool 

To validate the two prototypes, the therapy tool and the patient tool, an initial Wizard-
of-Oz  experiment  was  conducted.  The  low-fidelity  prototypes  were  used  by  one 

358 

L. Carriço et al. 

therapist and two simulated patients, at a university campus. Simulated patients were 
young students, one male and one female, selected randomly at the university campus. 
None had undergone therapy before. The therapist had extensive experience in SCST 
and was not involved in any of the preceding projects.  

The  sketches  were  used  with  rigid  frames,  emulating  real  devices  and  offering  a 
good  support  for  annotations  and  writing  on  the  sketches  if  needed.  Pencils  were 
offered for the participants to annotate (whenever they wanted to create textual anno-
tations) and mark any required information directly on the sketches.  

One Wizard was assigned for each participant, shadowing the user and acting both 
as the application and as the communication mechanism. To support communication 
between the various Wizards, cell-phones were utilized and calls were made sharing 
each participant’s location.  The therapist’s Wizard  would then  mark on the applica-
tion’s  map  the  current  location  of  each  simulated  patient.  Annotations  were  exchanged 
through SMS and MMS if including images, videos or sound. 

5   Results and Discussion  

Results from the experience were very positive. Regarding the feasibility and the effectiveness 
 of  the  entire  system,  the  envisioned  features  were  highly  appreciated  by  the 
therapist. The ability to easily access patients’ location, including the time spent at specific 
points and tasks were considered extremely useful. Besides allowing the therapist 
to control the patient’s route, for safety reasons (given that most patients are children), it 
also allowed the therapist to control whether the time spent at one spot was sufficient to 
complete a task or even just to control if the patient was actually following the route. 
According  to  the  participating  therapist,  this  provided  the  opportunity  to  gather  real, 
effective, and reliable information and provided much less space for error. Additionally, 
this also endows therapists with the ability to send motivating messages at crucial moments 
(just before the patient reaches the location for one given task), which is a decisive 
 moment  in  which  patients  usually  disengage  from  the  process  and  feel  more 
stressed. The communication options were also very much appreciated by the therapists, 
especially the possibility of sharing or concealing achievements from one patient with 
the others. Nevertheless, some suggestions and improvements also emerged. In particular,
 the inclusion of an S.O.S. button on the patient’s tool and the possibility of allowing 
patients to freely exchange messages between each other were also requested.  

Participants that acted as patients also provided valuable input. Both participants felt 
that the tool was very easy to use and allowed them to quickly understand their tasks. 
Following the pre-defined routes on the mobile device, and gathering data in different 
formats was also especially pleasing.  Once again, some suggestions  were made. One 
participant suggested the inclusion of a list of feelings that could be selected and quantified,
 rather than typing in the feeling. In addition, the second participant mentioned that 
if tasks could be subdivided, they would see more tasks completed, increasing motivation,
  and  would  help  them  while  setting  goals  and  priorities.  The  therapist  concurred 
with this suggestion.  

During  the  experience,  it  was  also  noticeable  that  voice  annotations  and  pictures 
were  frequently  used  and  clearly  preferred  to  textual  annotations/descriptions  of 
achievements, as it allowed them to quickly provide, and receive, feedback from the 
therapist,  increasing  confidence  throughout  the  process.    The  use  of  mobile  devices 

 

Evaluating a Prototype for Geo-referenced Collaborative Psychotherapy 

359 

was also deemed very adequate as it allowed them to pass unnoticed while collecting 
data and sharing information with the therapist. The therapist also agreed and considered 
 the  entire  infrastructure  very  appropriate  for  these  situations,  as  most  patients 
already carry their own devices.  

Overall, the system was deemed very helpful and easy to use. From the therapist’s 
perspective,  it  would  be  highly  beneficial  to  apply  on  children  and  teenagers  SCST 
and,  with  the  addition  of  communication  between  patients,  would  allow  groups  to 
greatly increase cooperation and, consequentially, motivation, engagement and results 
during therapy. 

6   The Application 

Based on the results of the experiment we completed and improved the design of the 
application which is currently under development, using Tablet-Pc’s as platform for 
the implementation. The  whole system consists of two  modules: one  for the patient 
and the other for the therapist. The current therapist’s  module interface is shown  in 
the figure 2b. Although the therapist’s and the patient’s interfaces look very similar 
their functionality differs from each other. This therapist’s application module runs in 
two different modes: one allows the therapist to define tasks the patients have to follow 
 and  the  other  allows  her  to  monitor  the  patients  while  they  are  performing  the 
task.  A  task  definition  may  contain  handwritten  text  and  sketches  (for  the  instruc-
tions), photographs, videos and sound that might clarify the task’s nature. Each task is 
geo-referenced, which means that is “anchored” to a certain geographic place where it 
should be carried on by the patient using the map displayed in the workspace of the 
therapist’s module interface.  

Additional to tasks, a therapist can define routes that the patient may have to follow,
  also  using  the  map  on  the  workspace.  Various,  already  defined  tasks  may  be 
assigned to a route and a certain order in which the tasks have to be performed can be 
defined. In the Figure 2b shows the interface during the definition of a route. As seen, 
routes are defined by free handwriting the route over the map. Tasks are anchored to 
geographical  places  by  marking  the  point  on  the  map  with  a  double  click  and  then 
entering a label for that task also by free handwriting. In the figure  we can see two 
Tasks geo-located and labeled as A1 and A2.  

At the right-hand side we see the elements of the task currently being created or edited.
 On the top we see the area where the activity is described, also using free handwriting,
  below  that  area  is  the  one  for  the  audio  files,  followed  by  the  area  for  the 
image and the video files. The area on the bottom of the right border is used to exchange 
hand  written  messages  with a patient and is not associated to a certain task. 
This area is activated when the system is being used in the mode for monitoring the 
patients. In this mode the therapist can see which patients are currently using the system 
for performing tasks. An icon identifying the patient appears in the upper area of 
the workspace (see figure 2b the three icons on the top). By selecting one of them the 
therapist can see where the patient is located, which task is performing now and can 
exchange messages with him.  

The  patient’s  module  allows  him  to  explore  a  task  definition  and  to  follow  it. 
While following the task the patient can see the task elements in the same way as they 

360 

L. Carriço et al. 

are displayed on the therapist’s interface. Additionally, the patient can input freehand 
annotations,  voice  messages,  images  taken  with  the  camera  of  the  mobile  device. 
These  elements  will  help  the  patient  and  the  therapist  to  analyze  the  performance 
together,  reflecting  about  the  things  that  were  good  done  and  which  could  be  improved.
 The patient has also the possibility of expressing his current mood by choosing 
an icon from a menu. If the patient chooses to use this icon, it will be displayed 
beside the patient’s icon on the interfaces of the therapist. 

Currently all the necessary communication between patients and therapist is realized 
with a client-server architecture. The patients’ mobile devices access the server 
using a wide area wireless network. We are evaluating the convenience of using also 
Bluetooth communication protocol for situations where a wireless wide area network 
is not available.   

7   Conclusions and Future Work 

In  this  paper  we  presented  the  validation  study  for  the  concept  of  a  geo-referenced 
collaborative  in-situ  group  therapy  system.  The  design  aims  at  overcoming  current 
limitations  of  traditional  social  competencies  and  skills  training,  a  process  that  is 
frequently required for children and young teenagers, suffering from extreme shyness, 
Asperger’s Syndrome, Autism, and related disorders.  

Our  design  concept  is  based  on  two  existing  systems  and  merges  functionalities 
from both in order to allow therapists to manage patients that circulate through different 
 locations  but  collaborate  in  order  to  achieve  specific  goals  and  motivate  each 
other. To test its feasibility and the overall design, a set of low-prototypes were created 
and a Wizard-of-Oz experience took place. A practicing therapist and simulated 
patients  participated  on  a  set  of  sessions  that  provided  insight  on  the  various  facets 
and dimensions that compose the system. Overall, results were significantly positive 
as the participating therapist greatly appreciated the concept and strongly encouraged 
its  continuation  into  a  future  development  stage.  In  addition,  the  remaining  participants,
 acting as patients, were also very pleased with the experience and clearly stated 
that they would use such a system for a wide variety of purposes.  

Based on these results, further experiences, with a larger group of participants and 
additional therapists, using new and improved prototypes, will be conducted and new 
features  will  be  tested.  As  the  process  evolves,  a  working  software  prototype  is  already 
being developed and will be tested in real world scenarios, with children currently 
undergoing therapy for social competencies training.  

Acknowledgements 

This  work  was  funded  by  FCT,  through  project  PTDC/EIA-EIA/103676/2008  (In-
SIThe)  and  the  Multiannual    Funding  Programme,  by  Fondecyt,  through  project 
1085010,  and  by  Latin  American  Collaborative  Research  Federation  (LACCIR), 
through project R1209LAC002.  

 

Evaluating a Prototype for Geo-referenced Collaborative Psychotherapy 

361 

References 

1.  White,  S.W.,  Keonig,  K.,  Scahill,  L.:  Social  skills  development  in  children  with  autism 
spectrum disorders: a review of the intervention research. J. Autism Dev. Disorders 37(10), 
1858–1868 (2007) 

2.  Chan,  D.,  Ramey,  S.L.,  Ramey,  C.T.,  Schmitt,  N.:  Modeling  intraindividual  changes  in 
children’s social skills at home and at school: a multivariate latent growth approach to understanding 
between-settings differences in children’s social skill development. Multivariate 
Behavioral Research 35(3), 365–396 (2000) 

3.  Bass, J.D., Mulick, J.A.: Social play skill enhancement of children with autism using peers 

and siblings as therapists. Psychology in the Schools 44(7), 727–735 (2007) 

4.  Marchant, M.R., Solano, B.R., Fisher, A.K., Caldarella, P., Young, K.R., Renshaw, T.L.: 
Modifying socially withdrawn behavior: a playground intervention for students with internalizing 
behaviors. Psychology in the Schools 44(8), 779–794 (2007) 

5.  Garrard,  C.S.:  Human-computer  interactions:  can  computers  improve  the  way  doctors 

work? Schweitz Med. Wochenschr 130(42), 1557–1563 (2000) 

6.  Proudfoot, J.G.: Computer-based treatment for anxiety and depression: is it feasible? Is it 

effective? Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews 28(3), 353–363 (2004) 

7.  Grasso, M.A.: Clinical Applications of Hand Held Computing. In: 17th IEEE Symposium 

on Computer Based Medical Systems, pp. 141–146. IEEE Press, Los Alamitos (2004) 

8.  Norton, M., Wonderlich, S.A., Myers, T., Mitchell, J.E., Crosby, R.D.: The use of palmtop 
computers in the treatment of bulimia nervosa. European Eating Disorders Review 11(3), 
231–242 (2003) 

9.  Przeworski, A., Newman, M.G.: Palmtop computer-assisted group therapy for social phobia.
 Journal of Clinical Psychology 60(2), 179–188 (2004) 

10.  Doherty, G., Coyle, D., Matthews, M.: Design and evaluation guidelines for mental health 

technologies. Interacting with Computers 22(4), 243–252 (2010) 

11.  Anhøj,  J.,  Møldrup,  C.:  Feasibility  of  Collecting  Diary  Data  From  Asthma  Patients 
Through Mobile Phones and SMS (Short Message Service): Response Rate Analysis and 
Focus  Group  Evaluation  From  a  Pilot  Study.  Journal  of  Medical  Internet  Research 6(4) 
(2004) 

12.  Holtz,  B.,  Whitten,  P.:  Managing  asthma  with  mobile  phones:  a  feasibility  study.  Telemedicine 
Journal and e-Health 15(9), 907–909 (2009) 

13.  Maitland, J., Sherwood, S., Barkhuus, L., Anderson, I., Hall, M., Brown, B., Chalmers, M., 
Muller, H.: Increasing the Awareness of Daily Activity Levels with Pervasive Computing. 
In:  1st  International  Conference  on  Pervasive  Computing  Technologies  for  Healthcare 
(2006) 

14.  Campbell, S.W., Kelley, M.J.: Mobile phone use among Alcoholics Anonymous members: 

new sites for recovery. New Media & Society 10(6), 915–933 (2008) 

15.  Hayes, T.L., Pavel, M., Larimer, N., Tsay, I.A., Nutt, J., Adami, A.G.: Distributed Health-
care: Simultaneous Assessment of Multiple Individuals. IEEE Pervasive Computing 6(1), 
36–43 (2007) 

16.  Tacconi, D., Mayora, O., Lukowicz, P., Arnrich, B., Tröster, G., Haring, C.: On the Feasibility 
of Using Activity Recognition and Context Aware Interaction to Support Early Diagnosis 
of Bipolar Disorder. In: Ubiwell 2007: Ubicomp Workshop Proceedings (2007) 

17.  Hu, B., Hu, B., Wan, J., Dennis, M., Chen, H.-H., Li, L., Zhou, Q.: Ontology-based ubiquitous 
monitoring and treatment  against depression. Wireless Comms. and Mobile Computing 
(2009) 

362 

L. Carriço et al. 

18.  Geyer, W., Richter, H., Fuchs, L., Frauenhofer, T., Daijavad, S., Poltrock, S.: A team collaboration 
space supporting capture and access of virtual meetings. In: Proceedings of the 
2001  International  ACM  SIGGROUP  Conference  on  Supporting Group  Work,  pp.  188–
196. ACM Press, New York (2001) 

19.  Myers, B.A.: The pebbles project: using PCs and hand-held computers together. In: CHI 
2000 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems. ACM Press, New York 
(2000) 

20.  Carriço, L., de Sá, M., Duarte, L., Carvalho, J.: Managing Group Therapy through Multiple 
Devices. In: Jacko, J.A. (ed.) HCI 2007. LNCS, vol. 4553, pp. 427–436. Springer, Heidelberg 
(2007) 

21.  Zurita,  G.,  Baloian,  N.,  Peña,  G.:  A  Mobile  Collaborative  Visual  System  to  Support 

Knowledge Creation. In: ICKM 2009 (2009) 

22.  de Sá, M., Carriço, L., Antunes, P.: Ubiquitous Psychotherapy. IEEE Pervasive Computing 
6(1), 20–27 (2007) 

23.  de Sá, M., Carriço, L.: Lessons from early stages design of mobile applications. In: 10th 
international conference on Human computer interaction with mobile devices and services, 
MobileHCI 2008, pp. 127–136. ACM Press, New York (2008) 

