Metaphorical Design of Virtual Museums

and Laboratories: First Insights

Daniel Biella1, Daniel Sacher1, Benjamin Weyers2,

Wolfram Luther1(&), and Nelson Baloian3

1 University of Duisburg, Essen, Germany
{daniel.biella,daniel.sacher,

wolfram.luther}@uni-due.de
2 RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany
weyers@vr.rwth-aachen.de
3 University of Chile, Santiago, Chile

nbaloian@dcc.uchile.cl

Abstract. This paper highlights and categorizes the rich metaphorical landscape 
of the modern virtual museum and laboratory realizations recently applied
in various leisure, information, presentation and education contexts. It also
presents several
from desktop systems to CAVE
installations.

resolutions,

technical

Keywords: Metaphorical design  Virtual museum  User interface  Case

studies

1 Introduction and Motivation

Digital heritage is an emerging research topic in the context of ambient intelligent space
in urban areas. On the one hand, cultural heritage is one of major topics in research
concerning urban history, where metaphors are present everywhere. On the other,
virtual representations of cultural heritage not only form the content of interactive and
collaborative virtual museums; they also often appear as applications of ambient
intelligence in games and entertainment, especially if this type of content is embedded
into real exhibitions.

Starting from existing exhibits or real world experimentation, research by Biella [1]
concerns the modeling process of virtual museums and laboratories (VML) and focuses
on the conception and creation of a virtual environment consisting of static and
dynamic scene objects and acting characters in a navigable world. To build such a
virtual world, developers and content specialists deﬁne tasks and goals using scientiﬁc
theories, formal process models, and appropriate modeling languages and tools. They
formulate requirements concerning conceptual design, the conceptual and perceptual
model, and interfaces to support user interactions with the scene objects. A suitable
metaphorical design has an important impact on the realization of such systems;
metaphors concern localization, navigation, local or temporal neighborhood, interaction 
and organizational issues.

© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
J.M. García-Chamizo et al. (Eds.): UCAmI 2015, LNCS 9454, pp. 427–438, 2015.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-26401-1_40

428

D. Biella et al.

This paper offers a short overview of the deﬁnition, types and uses of metaphors
provided in earlier realizations. Lakoff and Johnsen [2] emphasize “that metaphor is
pervasive in everyday life”,
that “most of our ordinary conceptual system is
metaphorical in nature”, and that “the essence of metaphor is understanding and
experiencing one kind of thing in terms of another”. Kuhn’s and Blumenthal’s tutorial
notes [3] explain “that metaphors allow users to understand computational target
domains in terms of familiar source domains”, that “most common metaphors are
spatial because space is central to perception and cognition”, and that “metaphors
provide a common ground for real and virtual activities”. As stated in Biella [1], the
metaphorical reference to physical places must also be completed by a reference to time
scale. He concludes that spatial metaphors provide a basic understanding of objects in
place and their relationship with one another and with their location, allowing the
designer to deﬁne consistent actions with regard to the virtual objects and allowing
users to move from one place to another and to interact intuitively with the objects. In
addition to the spatial design elements, temporal metaphors provide meaningful representations 
of the domain “time scale” via geometric models such as lines, polygons or
curves, and contextual metaphors create semantic frames and relationships in a virtual
place linking the intended use and the behavior of the place with a consistent set of
properties and actions.

The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces related work and focuses on
the impact of metaphorical design in various contexts. The discussion will show how
these techniques can be embedded into the creation and visiting process of VMLs.
Then we introduce a short classiﬁcation and several new approaches for the use of
metaphorical design in (non-)immersive VMLs (Sect. 3). In Sect. 4, an examination of
several case studies demonstrates the feasibility of these concepts. Section 5 discusses
our conclusions and presents future work.

2 Related Work

The metaphorical design in earlier work mostly focuses on icons as simple pictorial
realizations of metaphors and their mapping. Each operation system supplier has
published guidelines for icon design related to two-dimensional (2D) displays. These
guidelines ensure that the form and appearance of the icons follow a standardized
international design, independent of the intended world region and the cultural background 
of the user. The designer should use established concepts to ensure recognition,
and consistency of meaning and interpretation. Nielsen [4] pointed out that simple
metaphors with meaningful mappings between icon and represented action help users
to bring the system feature and their mental model into accord. Icons in user interfaces
have a conceptual aspect as well as a process-related aspect; van den Boomen [5] likens
them to the head of Janus, with, “one side [facing] the user, who must be able to read,
understand, and operate the icon; and the other [facing] software and machine pro-
cesses” to be launched and controlled by the user. Therefore, we have to raise the
question whether a metaphor can be at once conceptual and material, transferring a
selection of qualities and quantities between various domains using natural and formal
languages. This would be in accordance with Weyers [6], who shows that a user

Metaphorical Design of Virtual Museums and Laboratories

429

interface can be modeled as a three-layered architecture: (a) the physical representation,
describing the outward appearance as set of interaction elements, (b) the system to be
controlled, in the form of its system interface, and (c) the interaction logic, which
models the ﬂow of data between the two.

Spatial metaphors help people to navigate in a large hierarchy of places, rooms,
ﬂoors, buildings, areas, cities and landscapes. Kuhn and Blumenthal [3] cite three levels
of human spatial knowledge: Landmarks as salient points of reference in the environment,
 routes as paths for navigating between landmarks and survey frames as coherent
network route layouts. The visualization of instances of this knowledge can be 1-, 2or

3-dimensional and is generally scalable with several levels of detail. It is important to
recognize that there are various types of reference frames, for example, egocentric,
where the user is a part of a physical or virtual environment deﬁned as a set of objects
and a space in which the user moves and acts individually alongside other users, and
allocentric, where local coordinate systems help the observer, who is often represented
as an avatar, to locate an object in the visible neighborhood and to approach a location
via a sequence of up-down, front-back and left-right movements (cf. Fig. 3).

Kuhn and Blumenthal [3] explain that recognizing and identifying are based on
spatial relation schemata like neighborhood and directional link, motion on the path
schemata, organizing and ranking on order schemata and associating and aggregating
on near-far, link, path, and part-whole schemata.

In Lakoff and Johnsen [2] the authors describe several kinds of metaphors: “We use
ontological metaphors to comprehend events, actions, activities, and states.” Structural
metaphors involve “structuring one kind of thing or experience in terms of another
kind…”; “each structural metaphor has a consistent set of ontological metaphors as
sub-parts.” Metaphors that frame cooperation and interaction are discussed in several
papers, such as [7]. Here, Barbieri and Paoli understand “a cooperation metaphor [as]
a set of basic rules that describe the different modalities of interaction between users
and between users and their environment”. We prefer the term collaboration pattern,
where the patterns include structured, spatial and ontological metaphors and frame
activities that concern group structures and describe how to localize the avatars with
respect to the users, to navigate and to communicate with the group members.

From the large number of papers dealing with interaction design, we will cite only a
few that relate to VMLs. LaViola et al. [8, 9] discuss 3D user interfaces in immersive
virtual environments and provide a framework for the design of new interaction
metaphors. Whereas ofﬁce applications run on PCs with standard input devices like
keyboard and mouse and a two-dimensional output screen, post-WIMP (i.e., postwindows,
 -icons, -menus, -pointing) multimodal interaction, such as simultaneous
speech and gesture input, using gloves or acting directly in a CAVE-like environment,
provides a more natural way to communicate, select, manipulate or transform objects—
often directly—without interfering metaphors. Moving or navigating is done via a walk
or ﬂy metaphor and special purpose metaphors make the user aware of complementary
information or topics of interest. Geometric operations combining translation, rotation
and scaling are executed with a virtual hand that acts within the immediate neighborhood.
 With selection and manipulation outside the area of reach in mind, the raycasting 
metaphor metaphorically shoots a ray from the virtual hand into the scene to
detect and select an object which can then be manipulated by means of an interactive

430

D. Biella et al.

elastic arm (GoGo) or, alternatively, users can grow or shrink themselves to achieve
work on different scales.

To evaluate the metaphorical design, Hrimech et al. [10] present the results of an
experimental study examining the impact of three 3D interaction metaphors (i.e., ray
casting, GoGo and virtual hand) on the user experience in a semi-immersive collaborative 
virtual environment.

In conclusion, we want to emphasize the impact of successful metaphorical design
as a principal vehicle of user understanding and familiarization with an unknown
system from the beginning on. In the spirit of Lakoff and Johnsen [2], the designer has
to conceptualize and to concretize the mapping used to transfer concepts concerning
one ontological domain to another. We use our everyday experiences to interpret the
metaphor and to launch or execute the correct activity.

3 Classifying and Using Metaphors in Virtual Environments

In most applications, the ﬁrst contact with an unknown system occurs via standardized
user interface icons. There are several style guides for shaping icons and selecting
unambiguous symbols that are metaphors for underlying functions or activities;
important sets of icons used in standard ofﬁce applications are well known to the user.
Icons refer to actions, functionalities or system offers; their pictures look like the
intended feature. Landmarks and links help users to navigate and walk within the virtual 
environments or an application as well as to acquire information and execute the
correct activity.

Metaphorical spatial design provides places where activities are carried out, paths
leading to other places, and domains or semantic spaces consisting of several places
linked by paths and separated from other domains by thresholds. Metaphorical temporal 
design allows the user to change from the (actual or historical) present to the past
or the future. When conceiving a multidimensional metaphorical space, the designer
must guarantee spatial and temporal consistency, which can be realized using an
architectural ﬂoor plan with simple room icons and an ordered sequence of viewpoints
along a path that can be reached by point and click actions.

3D single-user interaction can be roughly classiﬁed into navigation (viewpoint
manipulation), object selection and manipulation, and application control. This
approach was extended to multi-hand and multi-user metaphors for interaction and
collaboration in many directions by Duval in [11], where the author introduces as an
example two distant users seeking to apply a manipulation technique on a virtual plane
deﬁned by three points. One user acts within a CAVE-like environment; his head and
two hands are tracked, and he uses his two hands to control 3D cursors; the second user
works with a desktop system, a head-tracking unit and a 2D input device (such as a 2D
mouse) for controlling a 3D ray.

Such co-manipulation is described (a) at the conceptual level using appropriate
collaboration metaphors depending on the available technical environment, (b) at the
network level by deﬁning a communication model, shared workspaces with allocated
tools and a synchronization mode, and (c) at the presentation level using convenient

Metaphorical Design of Virtual Museums and Laboratories

431

3D graphics APIs for heterogeneous architectures including suitable input and output
hardware and tracking systems.

Some emphasis is given to a new versatile 2D Pointer/3D Ray metaphor dedicated
to non-immersive or semi-immersive 3D interactions, which were tested in comparison
with other solutions. Some of the 3D pointing and picking metaphors have already
been deﬁned and implemented in Java3D or 3D game engines (e.g., jMonkey, OGRE,
Unity3D).

Camporesi and Kallmann [12] present another software framework for the development 
of immersive collaborative virtual reality applications, full-body character
animation, real-time full-body tracking and interaction metaphors. The system is capable
of retrieving information from platform-dependent devices, such as the motion-capture
system OptiTrack, 5DT data-gloves, 3D-Connexion mice, etc. The 3D graphical user
interface (GUI) manager includes primitives for distributed interactive widgets offering
user perspective interaction with virtual objects via virtual pointers and hands.

Figure 1 describes classes of conceptual metaphors used in VMs: spatial or temporal 
metaphors; spatial or time-relation metaphors; collections of simple icons used as
structural metaphors to represent various organizational forms in daily life; contextual
metaphors such as a VML tour along a certain path (moving from viewpoint to
viewpoint with a speciﬁc user interface), for example, a building ﬂoor hosting various
historical replications and extensions of a key experiment in a virtual laboratory; and
conceptual metaphors with their semantic frames for comprehending events, actions,
activities and states that are accessible in a certain room or context. Some of these
metaphors are included in the Virtual Museum and Cultural Object Exchange Format
(ViMCOX) metadata standard. ViMCOX 1.1 provides the semantic structure of
exhibitions and complete museums and includes features such as room and outdoor
area design, interactions with artwork, path planning, and dissemination and presentation 
of content [13].

User Interfaces

Pointing and Selection

in 2D/3D

Group Work

Collaborative Learning

Widgets

- Icon (2D)
- Toolbar
- Architectural Plan
- Process Interface

Used In

Realized In 

Conceptual Metaphor

Creates Structures
Organizes Collaboration and Communication
Creates
Context

Semantic Frames

- Linking intended use and behavior 
with a set of properties and actions 
- Regarding place and time

Space

- Spatial Relation
- Threshold

Time

Time-Relation

Facilitates

Must Ensure Spatial and
Temporal Consistency

Creates Relationship

Between

Objects

Applies To

Operations
- Orientation 
- Navigation  
- Identification
- Selection
- Execution

Fig. 1. Categorized conceptual metaphorical design in VMLs

432

D. Biella et al.

ViMCOX’s hierarchical structure allows the creation of exhibition areas: outdoor
areas, buildings with ﬂoors, entrance halls and rooms—in arbitrary shapes—that can be
linked directly as a ﬂoor plan or logically using metaphorical connectors.

Entrance hall, for instance, is a template-based conceptual metaphor with horizontal 
connectors to further rooms. A vertical connector between different entrance
halls, rooms or levels can be an elevator or a staircase. Viewpoints are camera poses,
marking points of interest; they are composed of location and view direction information.
 Connectors are elements that aid in navigation. Thresholds are horizontal
connections/transitions between rooms or outdoor areas and may be doors, teleporters,
gateways, or the like. From a technical point of view, connectors create links between
remote 3D scenes like rooms or outdoor areas. To support the loading of custom
connectors, we added this new attribute—the ability to specify a reference to a ViMCOX 
1.1 object type—thus enabling curators to select an appropriate metaphoric
connector for their architectural styles and exhibition contexts or themes. Metaphors
like elevators, thresholds or intersection spaces can provide temporal coherence.

The main advantage of a stringent metaphorical design is to facilitate users’ orientation 
and navigation, allowing them to access interesting viewpoints or to select and
execute the right action in the virtual environment without switching between several
screens and contexts or having to read explanatory text.

4 Use Cases

4.1 The Virtual Fleischhacker Museum

One of the most important problems in user interface design is the choice and consistent 
use of appropriate icons in order to support the interaction between user and
application. The system designer has to choose a comprehensible set of icons as
semiotic metaphors concerning orientation, navigation, information, the launch of
appropriate actions or dialogs and the deﬁnition of a new context.

Pictorial metaphors are easily recognizable and understandable and can be integrated 
or complemented by further metaphors. A series or (nested) set of icons—a
survey frame—can explain a complex abstract concept or a process, which avoids the
user having to read lengthy texts or tutorials, as shown on the right in Fig. 2. On the left
side of Fig. 2 is an example of a tour interface that contains icons for handling the user
actions “go forward”, “switch to the next room via the door connector” and “provide
more information about the artwork”.

Several metaphors accessible in the entrance hall are displayed in Fig. 3. Figure 4
shows an egocentric reference frame with a user avatar in the middle and a standard
interface with familiar icons such as metaphors for navigating within the room and
approaching a location via up-down, front-back, or left-right movements provided by
the X3D plugin; clicking on the information icon causes a text about the artwork to be
displayed, while further similar images can be accessed by clicking the “more pictures”
button. The location icon loads the ﬂoor plan overlay, where visitors can navigate to a
certain exhibition area via the teleporter metaphor (cf. Fig. 2).

Metaphorical Design of Virtual Museums and Laboratories

433

Fig. 2. Tour interface in Fleischhacker’s VM on the left; architectural building metaphor on the
right. The user moves via teleporter metaphor to one of the 13 rooms or to the outside area by
pointing and clicking on the corresponding room names in the list

Fig. 3. The entrance hall with connectors to 13 rooms and the area with the tombstones. The
user accesses the rooms via the point-and-click metaphor applied to one of the connectors, such
as a door, threshold or window, to access the outdoor area. http://mw2013.Museumsandtheweb.
com/paper/the-virtual-leopold-ﬂeischhacker-museum/

Our Replicave2 software [14] provides an exhibition layout based on a spatial
metaphorical framework design with navigation schemes. We use an octagonal
entrance hall as part of the building metaphor, which provides access to the other
exhibition areas. This metadata-based generative approach facilitates more ﬂexible
generation of exhibition spaces and enables automatic distribution of contents, metaphoric 
room connectors and camera viewpoints marking points of interest.

Sacher et al. [15] describe the realization of the virtual Fleischhacker museum in a
Cave Automated Virtual Environment—a ﬁve-sided CAVE located in Aachen,
Germany (aixCAVE). Alternatively, it is possible to use low-cost VR systems such as
Google CardBoard, Oculus Rift or other tangible or multi-touch interfaces.

434

D. Biella et al.

Fig. 4. Egocentric reference frame with a user avatar (seated, in the middle) and a standard
interface with familiar navigation icons

The actual scenario offers spatial, contextual and content-related awareness to users
and a great potential for interacting with the exhibit and collaborating on shared work.
QR codes are used to access audio recordings and other materials, which are placed
in direct proximity to the exhibits; these codes link to our HTML-based metadata
renderer and 3D-object browser (cf. Fig. 5). Furthermore, the digital object browser
allows visitors to browse the 2D/3D exhibition items and their corresponding metadata
as well as to rotate, zoom and pan the 3D reconstructions or to watch predeﬁned
animations.

Fig. 5. Users in a CAVE scanning QR codes in the Fleischhacker virtual museum

Metaphorical Design of Virtual Museums and Laboratories

435

4.2 Virtual Museum for Replicated Scientiﬁc Laboratories

and Experiments

In his thesis, Biella [1] describes the design and implementation of psychological key
experiments in a virtual 3D environment using a new 3D virtual museum framework
system. The environment is a building consisting of a ground ﬂoor with an entrance
hall, media room and gallery, as well as several other ﬂoors devoted to selected key
psychological experiments (See Fig. 6).

Temporal Metaphor

Past

(Historic) Present

Future 

2D 
Lab

…..

2D 
Lab

3D Lab

…..

2D 
Lab
Conceptual Metaphor

2D 
Lab

3D Lab

Elevator

2D 
Lab

2D
Lab

Gallery

Access
Hall

Media
Room

…..

2D 
Lab

Second Floor

…..

2D 
Lab

First Floor

Ground Floor

Fig. 6. Metaphorical design in Virtual Laboratories [1]

The temporal metaphor “elevator” provides access to the conceptual metaphor
“ﬂoor”; each “ﬂoor” hosts a historical experiment reconstructed in a 3D laboratory and
creates a consistent context: experiments that represent the same scientiﬁc theory are
thus connected through a contextual metaphor. Moving left or right, the user can
proceed to older and newer versions of the experiment visualized in 2D. The elevator
serves as connector and the time spent to proceed to another ﬂoor allows for loading a
new virtual world. The spatial design provides places where activities are carried out,
paths for accessing other places, and domains or semantic spaces consisting of several
places linked by paths and separated from other domains by thresholds.

The temporal design allows the user to change from historical present to past or
future relative to the actual époque by walking through the ﬂoor and opening doors to
related experiments. Conceiving a multidimensional metaphorical space, the designer is
obliged to guarantee spatial and temporal consistency, which was realized through
explicit access points to the elevator and the completely ordered space “ﬂoor”.

4.3 Use Case in Daily Elder Care

Pinske et al. [16] propose a further step in UI development in ambient assisted living
research that inverts the roles of technical system and user, that is, the system senses a

436

D. Biella et al.

human process and reports the state of task completion using metaphors. This concept
views the user as being inﬂuenced by the system in a certain way, in contrast to the
normal deﬁnition of HCI, where the human controls the system. A metaphor is
modeled as a set of possible visual or acoustic symbols embedded in a certain context
and a set of interpretations associated via IDs with appropriate contexts. Metaphors are
grouped in MetaphorClass nodes in the XML representation. Class nodes correspond to
event structures, mental events, emotions, and so forth and contain more speciﬁc
MetaphorGroup nodes that subdivide the classes. Using simple sensors, the monitoring
system scrutinizes the surrounding world and the human activities. The data gathered is
used to select an appropriate metaphor model from the XML-based dataset and a
context model describing how the metaphor is to be instantiated. Both models are
transferred to the metaphor renderer, which generates a concrete visual or physical
representation (cf. Fig. 7).

Monitoring

System

n
o
i
t
c
e
l
e
S

a
t
a
D

t
x
e
t
n
o
C

a
t
a
D

Metaphor

r
o
h
p
a
t
e

M

l
e
d
o
M

t
x
e
t
n
o
C

l
e
d
o
M

Metaphor
Renderer

XML-based
Metaphor
Models

Metaphor
Selection

Context
Selection

XML-based

Context

Knowledge

Fig. 7. Metaphor rendering system [16]

By using metaphors, undesirable behavior in elderly people is corrected without the
need to confront the individuals directly with their mistakes. Instead, analogies are
composed which are familiar to the individuals. The proposed metaphorical design was
realized by Weber in his dissertation [17] as a mechanical motor-driven ﬂower that
blooms or droops depending on an individual’s level of success in accomplishing his or
her daily routine. This routine has been formerly identiﬁed through an automatic

Metaphorical Design of Virtual Museums and Laboratories

437

activity recognition system that was developed at the Fraunhofer-inHaus-Center in
Duisburg. The main purpose of this metaphorical feedback is to indicate the extent to
which the user’s daily activities correspond to “normal behavior” in a simple, understandable 
way.

5 Outlook and Current Work

This paper demonstrates that the application of a stringent conceptual metaphorical
design based on a metadata standard enables users to be familiar with an unknown
system from the start, provides intuitive navigation, supports group building and various 
forms of interactions, and guarantees consistency in spatial layout and temporal
order of action spaces. As stipulated in the ViMCOX standard,
the Replicave2
3D-visualization framework provides template-based conceptual metaphors, which
facilitates the ability to generate and arrange rooms and metaphorical connectors
dynamically—depending on various construction parameters—and allows for the
extensibility of the concept. Metaphorical design depends greatly on user interface
design and degree of immersion, especially in multi-user scenarios.

Users’ acceptance and the usability of a conceptual metaphorical design will be
measured and evaluated by means of user questionnaires during a planned exhibition of
Fleischhacker’s estate in the Düsseldorf Memorial to the Victims of Persecution from
November 2015 to February 2016. At this venue, we will also introduce and evaluate a
gesture-based navigation approach utilizing Leap Motion VR Input device(s) and a
one-screen projection of The Virtual Leopold Fleischhacker Museum.

The Leap Motion API (https://developer.leapmotion.com/documentation/csharp/
api/Leap.Gesture.html) provides native support for dynamic gestures, which are similar
to our touch-screen input as depicted in Fig. 3. The horizontal swipe gesture can be
adapted for rotating the scene, by such means as mapping the velocity and direction of
the performed gesture to the 3D scene’s viewpoint-rotation around the Y-axis. The key
tab gesture is suitable for forward/backward movement in the XZ-plane, where the
movement direction is determined by the ﬁngertip’s motion direction. While QR codes
are used to access exhibit-related metadata, the screen tap gesture—where the tip of a
ﬁnger pokes forward—can be used to access this information, as well, or to navigate,
for example, moving to another room by pointing to a door metaphor. A simple circular
ﬁnger motion could trigger reset or reload the virtual museum. Our preliminary
research has focused on dynamic gestures performed by a single user as mentioned
above and has not yet considered interaction with the environment or with tangible
objects or collaborative gestures.

References

1. Biella, D.: Replication of classical psychological experiments in virtual environments. Ph.D.

thesis, University of Duisburg-Essen, Logos, Berlin (2006)

2. Lakoff, G., Johnsen, M.: Metaphors We Live By. The University of Chicago Press, London

(2003)

438

D. Biella et al.

3. Kuhn, W., Blumenthal, B.: Spatialization: spatial metaphors for user interfaces. In: CHI
1996 Conference Companion on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Tutorial Notes
(1996)

4. Nielsen, J.: Icon classiﬁcation: resemblance, reference, and arbitrary icons. http://www.

nngroup.com/articles/classifying-icons/. Accessed 17 August 2014

5. van den Boomen, M.: Interfacing by iconic metaphors. Conﬁgurations 16, 33–55 (2008).

The Johns Hopkins University (2009)

6. Weyers, B.: Reconﬁguration of user interface models for monitoring and control of
human-computer systems. Ph.D. thesis, University of Duisburg-Essen, 2011, Dr. Hut Verlag
(2012)

7. Barbieri, T., Paolini, P.: Cooperation metaphors for virtual museums. In: Proceedings of

Museum&Web (2001). http://www.archimuse.com/mw2001/papers/barbieri/barbieri.html

8. LaViola Jr., J.J.: Interaction in virtual reality: categories and metaphors. In: van Dam, A.,
Forsberg, A., Laidlaw, D.H., LaViola Jr., J.J., Simpson, R.M. (eds.) Immersive VR for
Scientiﬁc Visualization: A Progress Report. Computer Graphics and Applications, vol. 20,
no. 6, pp. 26–52. IEEE Press, New York (2002)

9. Bowman, D.A., Kruijff, E., LaViola Jr., J.J., Poupyrev, I.: 3D User Interfaces: Theory and

Practice, 3rd edn. Addison-Wesley, Reading (2011)

10. Hrimech, H., Alem, L., Merienne, F.: How 3D interaction metaphors affect user experience
in collaborative virtual environment. Adv. Hum. –Comput. Interact. 2011, 11. Article ID
172318 (2011)

11. Duval, T.: Models for Design, Implementation and Deployment of 3D Collaborative Virtual

Environments. Université Rennes 1 (2012)

12. Camporesi, C., Kallmann, M.: A framework for immersive VR and full-body avatar

interaction. In: Virtual Reality (VR), pp. 79–80. IEEE Press, New York (2013)

13. Biella, D., Luther, W., Sacher, D.: Schema migration into a web-based framework for
generating VMs and laboratories. In: 18th International Conference on Virtual Systems and
Multimedia (VSMM) 2012, pp. 307–314. IEEE Press, Milan (2012)

14. Sacher, D., Biella, D., Luther, W.: Towards a versatile metadata exchange format for digital
museum collections. In: IEEE Proceedings 2013 Digital Heritage International Congress,
Marseilles, France, vol. 2, pp. 29–136. IEEE Press, 28 October–1 November 2013

15. Sacher, D., Weyers, B., Kuhlen, T.W., Luther, W.: An integrative tool chain for collaborative
virtual museums in immersive virtual environments. In: Baloian, N., Zorian, Y., Taslakian, P.,
Shoukouryan, S. (eds.) CRIWG 2015. LNCS, vol. 9334, pp. 86–94. Springer, Heidelberg
(2015)

16. Pinske, D., Weyers, B., Luther, W., Stevens, T.: Metaphorical design of feedback interfaces
in activity-aware ambient assisted-living applications. In: Bravo, J., Hervás, R., Rodríguez,
M. (eds.) IWAAL 2012. LNCS, vol. 7657, pp. 151–158. Springer, Heidelberg (2012)

17. Weber, K.: A system for rating activities and monitoring behavior in ambient assisted living

environments. Diploma thesis, University of Duisburg-Essen (2012). (in German)

