Efﬁcient Planning of Urban Public

Transportation Networks

Nelson Baloian1(&), Jonathan Frez2, José A. Pino1,

and Gustavo Zurita3

1 Department of Computer Science, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile

{nbaloian,jpino}@dcc.uchile.cl
2 Universidad Diego Portales, Santiago, Chile

jonathan.frez@mail.udp.cl

3 Management Control and Information Systems Department,

Economics and Business Faculty, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile

gzurita@fen.uchile.cl

Abstract. Planning efﬁcient public transport is a key issue in modern cities.
When planning a route for a bus or the line for a tram or subway it is necessary
to consider the demand of the people for this service. In this work we presented
a method to use existing crowdsourcing data (like Waze and OpenStreetMap)
and cloud services (like Google Maps) to support a transportation network
decision making process. The method is based the Dempster-Shafer Theory to
model transportation demand and uses data from Waze to provide a congestion
probability and data from OpenStreetMap to provide information about location
of facilities such as shops, in order to predict where people may need to start or
end their trip using public transportation means. The paper also presents an
example about how to use this method with real data. The example shows how
to analyze the current availability of public transportation stops in order to
discover its weak points.

Keywords: Dempster-Shafer theory  Transportation networks  Smart cities

1 Introduction and Related Work

Cities are constantly growing. Their decision making problems are increasingly complex,
 and better methods to evaluate solutions are needed in order to support this
growing [1].

Many decision problems are spatial. A typical problem is to deﬁne an area to
support a certain requirement or service, e.g., a place for a new road, set an industrial
area, locate a hospital. Besides, cities are constantly changing, and they have dynamic
problems, like in public transportation services: the routes can be dynamically deﬁned
to cope with new requirements and constraints. Some of the decisions may be to ﬁnd a
place for a new bus station, deﬁne a route, deﬁne multiple routes, or even plan a full
transportation network.

According to [2], a “smart city” is a city that monitors and integrates data and
information of its critical infrastructures, including roads, bridges, tunnels, rails, subways,
 airports, seaports to better optimize its resources, and maximize services to its
citizens.

© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
J.M. García-Chamizo et al. (Eds.): UCAmI 2015, LNCS 9454, pp. 439–448, 2015.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-26401-1_41

440

N. Baloian et al.

At same time, citizens are using information technologies (IT) to consume and
provide data that can be used to support the decision making process of several cities
requirements. Some of the IT used by citizens can be supported by Cloud Computing
Services providing Software as a Service (SaaS). The SaaS model of Cloud Computing
is often accessed by citizens from mobile applications and web interfaces [3]. Some of
the SaaS services with spatial data properties are, e.g., Google Maps, OpenStreetMaps
and Waze. These services provide geo-localized data in a graphical way, they are free,
and they share a singular characteristic: they use Crowdsourcing data to provide data.
Here we report the use of services provided by Google Maps, OpenStreetMaps and
Waze to develop a Spatial Decision Support System for transportation network planning,
 speciﬁcally for the Origin-Destination (OD) evaluation. The OD evaluation is
done with the Dempster-Shafer theory [4]. This theory allows to model decisions based
on uncertain and incomplete data, by studying the extent a hypothesis can be supported
by data.

In [6], authors describe a user-friendly web-based spatial decision support system
(wSDSS) aimed at generating optimized vehicle routes for multiple vehicle routing
problems that involve serving the demand located along arcs of a transportation network.
 The wSDSS incorporates Google Maps (cartography and network data),
a database, a heuristic and an ant-colony meta-heuristic developed by the authors to
generate routes and detailed individual vehicle route maps. It accommodates realistic
system speciﬁcs, such as vehicle capacity and shift time constraints, as well as network
constraints such as one-way streets and prohibited turns. The wSDSS can be used for
“what-if” analysis related to possible changes to input parameters such as vehicle
capacity, maximum driving shift time, seasonal variations of demand, network modiﬁcations,
 and imposed arc orientations. The system was tested for urban trash collection 
in Coimbra, Portugal.

A crowdsourcing database is the OpenStreetMap project [7]. Worldwide, several
volunteers are contributing information to this “free” geodatabase. In some cases this
database exceeds proprietary ones by a 27 % [8], and for some authors [9] it is more
complete than Google maps or Bing maps. OpenStreetmap data has been proposed to
support trafﬁc related decisions by developing trafﬁc simulations [10], or solutions to
achieve a new web-based trip optimization tool [11]. It has also been used to support
transportation network planning [12]. Also, a spoken-dialogue prototype for pedestrian
navigation in Stockholm by using various grounding strategies and based on OpenStreetMaps 
is described in [13]. Similarly, Jacob et al. [14] present a web-based
campus guidance system for pedestrian navigation aimed at providing support for
visitors. They developed an OpenStreetMap based system to generate short paths using
both outdoor walkways and indoor corridors between various locations.

Another popular crowdsourcing geodatabase is being generated by Waze. Waze is a
mobile GPS application that allows to measure and report trafﬁc conditions and events,
e.g., it automatically detects trafﬁc jams, users can report accidents, weather effects on
the roads, and other alerts. In the literature we did not ﬁnd a decision support system
using Waze data, maybe because it is hard to obtain. However, we found trafﬁc
condition analysis systems [15] based on real time data obtained from Waze.com using
a WebCrawler, and an accidents data mining analysis proposal [16] based on the same
real time data from Waze.com. In our work the data is obtained using the same

Efﬁcient Planning of Urban Public Transportation Networks

441

technique: we developed a WebCrawler to reconstruct an historical database based on
published data on waze.com.

We focus on spatial DSS using belief functions [17], in particular Dempster-Shafer
theory (DST). The DST proposes to use sets of hypotheses regarding a variable (e.g.
the temperatures at a location are between t1 and t2) associated with a probability of
being correct. Using belief functions we can provide a “hypotheses support value”
called belief. The belief can be assigned to a certain geographical area satisfying
a hypotheses set.

2 The OD Route Problem

transportation networks are composed of various transportation lines
Regional
designed to cooperate and complement an urban scale transportation solution [18]. The
planning of the paths or routes of a new transportation method is usually based on
existing network data, volume predictions and the distribution in the network [19].

When a decision maker chooses a route, the travel time and time reliability are
important factors under demand and supply uncertainty. When designing an urban
route for a new transportation service, the choices must consider the behavior and
reliability of the transportation network. Another factor is the OD trafﬁc demand [21].
The OD describes the trafﬁc demand between a particular OD during a time period.
A public transportation system is typically a complex network. In Santiago it
includes bus stations and routes, subway stations and routes, shared taxi stations and
routes. Each OD is composed of a start station and an ending station. A single OD can
have multiple sub-OD in a single route. The design of a public transportation system is
a task requiring analysis of the transportation demand, the trafﬁc conditions of the
possible routes for each OD, and the reliability of the OD. In order to deﬁne an OD
route based on uncertain demand information, we propose to adapt belief maps [17].
This concept is based on the DST. A belief map allows to evaluate a geographical area
generating a suitability evaluation on a set of hypotheses supporting a possible solution.
For example, a map can show the belief degree of ﬁnd people in each evaluated area.
The hypotheses supporting this map can be “People go to commercial areas”, or
“People can be in schools”.

3 Determining the OD Route

We propose a new concept called belief routes (BR). A BR can be used to evaluate
demand hypotheses of an OD. A BR is composed of 3 basic elements: A set of
hypotheses that deﬁnes a possible transportation demand of an OD; The Origin and
Destination; The “polyline” or path of the route. Using this deﬁnition of BR, the
decision maker can compare various paths satisfying the demands in each OD. Also, the
decision maker can adjust the Origin or Destination. Another factor in the OD evaluation
is the transportation and reliability time. In order to support both indicators we propose
to combine the trafﬁc information from Waze creating a belief value based on historical
data. We call the result of this combination a Belief Congestion Route (BCR).

442

N. Baloian et al.

In order to explain the use of the BR and BCR in the decision making processes we
are going to use a basic example: A single OD with two possible paths. In Figs. 1 and 2,
two options are shown (A and B respectively). In this example route A is shorter than B,
and the travel time is also shorter according to Google Directions API.

Fig. 1. Route A

Fig. 2. Route B

In Figs. 3 and 4, the transportation demand is represented by a BR, according to
OpenStreetMap and the proposed hypothesis, route B has more demand than route A.

Fig. 3. Belief route A

Fig. 4. Belief route B

In Figs. 5 and 6 the BCR of both routes are shown. According to the Waze
information for both paths, route A has more belief of having congestions or trafﬁc
jams which implies less reliability.

Fig. 5. Congestion route A

Fig. 6. Congestion route B

Efﬁcient Planning of Urban Public Transportation Networks

443

From this example we can note that route B has less congestion and more demand
than route A. However route A is shorter and the decision will depend of what kind of
OD the decision maker is looking for. In order to support the decision, the visual
evaluation of the BR and BCR is not enough. An evaluation metrics framework is
needed and it will be part of our future work.

4 An Application for Developing Belief Routes

We developed a prototype that allows its users to deﬁne an OD pair and it automatically 
provides the shortest route using the Google Route Service. It also allows the user
to specify hypotheses for transportation demand modelling, after which it can generate
two types of visualization: The demand Belief Route and the Congestion route (see
Fig. 7). The platform provides Average Belief of the generated 3D visualization.

Fig. 7. Evaluation of an OD using the developed application

The application allows setting a transportation demand hypotheses set compatible
with the Dempster-Shaffer Theory. It also allows including some model restrictions, for
example: avoid schools. After the hypotheses are included, the application allows
choosing the type of 3d map which will be generated and shown: BR or BCR.

5 Belief Routes in Real World

In order to test the proposed concept, we are going to use real data from a public
transportation system. The testing method is simple: we use real data to evaluate an
hypothesis set (used to build the BR), if the prediction generated by the hypothesis set
“matches” with the real data we assume the hypotheses hold and thus the generated
BRs are valid.

444

N. Baloian et al.

For the test we selected two different areas with high transportation activities in the
city of Santiago de Chile. These areas were selected because one is representative for
having many shops in the city center and the other is representative for a residential
area with high population. Both areas have an important number of subway and bus
stations. For these transportation methods we have the information about the time and
location were people starts using each service. This was possible because the integrated
public transportation system of Santiago (called “Transantiago”) uses exclusively
plastic cards with magnetic bands which should be pre-loaded with money as payment
method. In this way, the system registers the point where every passenger started her
trip. However, it does not register the point where it ends. Data were obtained from the
Ministry of Transport.

Let’s call “A” to the area in the city center, and B to an area that leads to residential
areas with a high population. We ﬁrst used the data for generating a heatmap coloring
with intensity from 0 to 1 the areas where bus and subway stops are concentrated. The
generated heatmaps showing the concentration of public transportation stops are shown
on Fig. 8.

Fig. 8. Transportation network spatial distribution. Left: “A”. Right: “B”.

In a similar way, we used the data for generating a heatmap according to the
number of people starting their trips at a certain bus or subway stop. The generated
maps for both areas are shown in Fig. 9.

From Figs. 8 and 9 we can conclude that people concentrate their starting point at
fewer stations than the available, which is something we would expect. This does not
mean they are not using the other stations since they can be used to get off at them, but
we cannot collet this data.

In order to generate scenarios which allow us to calculate belief routes which are
usable for the travelers we have to propose hypotheses that generate scenarios
according to the reality. This means, we should construct hypotheses that predict at
least where people are going to start their trips with public transport. For this, we will
propose two hypotheses which relate elements in the city with transportation needs for
the people:

Efﬁcient Planning of Urban Public Transportation Networks

445

Fig. 9. Colored areas show spots where people start their trip using public transportation. Left:
“A”. Right: “B”.

1. People start their trips using public transport means near “shops”.
2. People start their trips using public transport means near “amenities”.

Both terms, “shops” and “amenities”, are standard tags for labelling geographical
objects in OpenStreetMap. The deﬁnition of “amenity” covers “an assortment of
community facilities including toilets, telephones, banks, pharmacies and schools.”

The results of applying of both hypotheses to area “B” can be seen in Fig. 10.
Comparing these scenarios with Fig. 9 right, we can note that shop places coincide in
both maps with minimal differences. On the contrary, for amenities there is almost no
match.

Fig. 10. Belief map applying the hypotheses for “B” area separately. Left: Amenity places.
Right: Shop Places.

From these results, we can conclude that the hypothesis that shop places generate

trips starting in their near environment is a better predictor. (see Fig. 11).

446

N. Baloian et al.

Fig. 11. Comparison at “B”. Left: People concentration. Right: Shop Places.

When applying the “shops” hypothesis to the A area we ﬁnd only some coincidence
between the starting points and the shops. This is however explained by the fact that
there is no bus and subway stations near some shops, as can be seen comparing the
maps in Fig. 8 left, showing the stops, and Fig. 12 left showing the shops. In this way
we can estimate a lack of proper public transportation stops in an area which according
to the hypothesis should have a great demand of them.

Fig. 12. Comparison at “A”. Left: People concentration. Right: Shop Places.

6 Conclusions

In this work we presented a method to use existing crowdsourcing data to support a
transportation network decision making process. The method uses the Dempster-Shafer
Theory to provide a framework to model transportation demand based on the OpenStreetMap 
Data. The method also provide a simple way of use the Waze application
data to provide a congestion probability value to each segment of a route.

Efﬁcient Planning of Urban Public Transportation Networks

447

In this work we propose that the use of croudsourcing data to build the transportation 
demand metric and the congestion probability it is possible to support a
transportation network decision making process.

References

1. Heilig, G.K., World urbanization prospects the 2011 revision. United Nations, Department
of Economic and Social Affairs (DESA), Population Division, Population Estimates and
Projections Section, New York (2012)

2. Harrison, C., et al.: Foundations for smarter cities. IBM J. Res. Dev. 54(4), 1–16 (2010)
3. Chourabi, H., et al. Understanding smart cities: an integrative framework. In: 45th Hawaii

International Conference on System Science (HICSS), 2012. IEEE (2012)

4. Shafer, G.: A Mathematical Theory of Evidence, vol. 1. Princeton University Press,

Princeton (1976)

5. Piro, G., et al.: Information centric services in Smart Cities. J. Syst. Softw. 88, 169–188

(2014)

6. Santos, L., Coutinho-Rodrigues, J., Antunes, C.H.: A web spatial decision support system

for vehicle routing using Google Maps. Decis. Support Syst. 51(1), 1–9 (2011)

7. Haklay, M., Weber, P.: Openstreetmap: User-generated street maps. IEEE Pervasive

Comput. 7(4), 12–18 (2008)

8. Neis, P., Zielstra, D., Zipf, A.: The street network evolution of crowdsourced maps:

OpenStreetMap in Germany 2007–2011. Future Internet 4(1), 1–21 (2011)

9. Ciepłuch, B., et al.: Comparison of the accuracy of OpenStreetMap for Ireland with Google
Maps and Bing Maps. In: Proceedings of the Ninth International Symposium on Spatial
Accuracy Assessment in Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences. University of
Leicester, 20–23 July 2010

10. Zilske, M., Neumann, A., Nagel, K.: OpenStreetMap for trafﬁc simulation. In: Proceedings

of the 1st European State of the Map–OpenStreetMap Conference (2011)

11. Klug, M. CS Transport-optimisation–a solution for web-based trip optimization basing on

OpenStreetMap. In: 19th ITS World Congress (2012)

12. Joubert, J.W. Van Heerden, Q.: Large-scale multimodal transport modelling. Part 1: Demand

generation (2013)

13. Boye, J., et al.: Walk this way: spatial grounding for city exploration. In: Mariani, J., Rosset,
S., Garnier-Rizet, M., Devillers, L. (eds.) Natural Interaction with Robots, Knowbots and
Smartphones, pp. 59–67. Springer, New York (2014)

14. Jacob, R., Zheng, J., Ciepłuch, B., Mooney, P., Winstanley, A.C.: Campus guidance system
for international conferences based on OpenStreetMap. In: Carswell, J.D., Fotheringham, A.
S., McArdle, G. (eds.) W2GIS 2009. LNCS, vol. 5886, pp. 187–198. Springer, Heidelberg
(2009)

15. Silva, T.H., de Melo, P.O.S.V., Viana, A.C., Almeida, J.M., Salles, J., Loureiro, A.A.F.:
Trafﬁc condition is more than colored lines on a map: characterization of waze alerts. In:
Jatowt, A., Lim, E.-P., Ding, Y., Miura, A., Tezuka, T., Dias, G., Tanaka, K., Flanagin, A.,
Dai, B.T. (eds.) SocInfo 2013. LNCS, vol. 8238, pp. 309–318. Springer, Heidelberg (2013)
16. Fire, M., et al.: Data mining opportunities in geosocial networks for improving road safety.
In: IEEE 27th Convention of Electrical and Electronics Engineers in Israel (IEEEI) 2012.
IEEE (2012)

448

N. Baloian et al.

17. Frez, J., et al.: Dealing with incomplete and uncertain context data in geographic information
systems. In: Computer Supported Cooperative Work in Design (CSCWD), IEEE, Editor
2014, pp. 129–134. IEEE, Hsinchu, Taiwan (2014)

18. Yang, L., Wan, B.: A multimodal composite transportation network model and topological
relationship building algorithm. In: International Conference on Environmental Science and
Information Application Technology, 2009, ESIAT 2009. IEEE (2009)

19. Liu, S., et al.: Modeling and simulation on multi-mode transportation network. In: 2010
International Conference on Computer Application and System Modeling (ICCASM). IEEE
(2010)

20. Xu, L., Gao, Z.: Bi-objective urban road transportation discrete network design problem
under demand and supply uncertainty. In: IEEE International Conference on Automation
and Logistics, 2008, ICAL 2008. IEEE (2008)

21. Castillo, E., et al.: The observability problem in trafﬁc models: algebraic and topological

methods. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 9(2), 275–287 (2008)

