 

Handheld-Based Electronic Meeting Support 

Gustavo Zurita1 and Nelson Baloian2  

1 Universidad de Chile, Departamento de Sistemas de Información y Auditoría, 

Diagonal Paraguay 257, Santiago de Chile, Chile 

gnzurita@facea.uchile.cl 

2 Universidad de Chile, Departamento de Ciencia de la Computación, 

Avenida Blanco Encalada 2120, Santiago de Chile, Chile 

nbaloian@dcc.uchile.cl 

Abstract. Many studies have reported on the problems that arise when trying to 
carry  out  successful  meetings.  Various  authors  have  developed  computerized 
tools  for  supporting  the  different  stages  of  a  meeting,  but  most  of  these  have 
been conceived for large PCs or Notebooks, which tend to distract the participants 
 from  face-to-face  interaction.  Also,  many  meetings  are  organized  in  a 
spontaneous manner, sometimes with no access to PCs. In this paper, we propose 
a meeting support tool for handhelds that overcomes many of the problems 
inherent  in  the  use  of  devices  with  large  screens.  However,  the  small  size  of 
handheld  displays  leads  to  other  problems,  especially  in  human-handheld  and 
human-human interactions. The system proposed here is designed using gesture 
and concept-map principles that enable these problems to be resolved.  

1   Introduction 

Face-to-face meetings are a frequent activity in any organization [1], and as such their 
effectiveness  and  productivity  is  an  important  requirement  [1],  [2].  Various  surveys 
indicate that meetings take up 40% to 50% of management’s time. One-half of meeting 
participants  found them to be lacking in productivity,  with 25% of the time devoted 
to irrelevant matters and the total time they take up now twice what it was 20 
years ago [3]. Thus, meetings have come to be seen as time-consuming and unproductive 
[4]. 

Despite the existence of procedures, rules and mechanisms designed to ensure that 
meetings are both effective and productive [1], [5], [6], they continue to suffer from 
various problems (see Section 2) such as no agenda or agenda-setting process, lack of 
a common workspace for participants, difficulties in the drawing up of minutes, lack 
of follow-up on commitments, and the absence of voting mechanisms [2], [7], [9]. 

To solve these problems, technological scaffolding has been developed and tested 
based  on  personal  computers  (PCs).  Known  as  EMS  (Electronic  Meeting  Support), 
these solutions provide procedures and mechanisms aimed at achieving effective and 
productive  face-to-face  meetings  [6],  [8].  Nevertheless,  it  has  been  demonstrated  in 
[10] and [11] that the PC and notebook interfaces and screens used for meeting support 
capture the attention and cognitive concentration of participants to such an extent 
that social interaction is reduced. Furthermore, if PCs are employed, meetings must be 

H. Fuks, S. Lukosch, and A.C. Salgado (Eds.): CRIWG 2005, LNCS 3706, pp. 341 – 350, 2005. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2005 

342 

G. Zurita and N. Baloian 

held  in  specific  physical  spaces  [9],  [12],  making  coordination  and  cohesion  more 
difficult in project scenarios that involve people from various organizations or work 
teams who need to meet face-to-face in a variety of locations [12]. As pointed out in 
[11], the ability to bring technological support to the meeting place requires the mobility 
offered by notebooks and handhelds. According to [10], handhelds are easier to 
use as a support tool for face-to-face meetings. 

In [13], [14] and [15] it is posited that handheld portable computer devices are nonobstructive 
and create a feeling of belonging to the user, given that they may be employed 
in various organizational tasks and can be carried permanently on one’s person 
to any place and used at any time. Handhelds are considered to be a good platform for 
reading  brief,  concrete  content  because  their  interface  is  simple  and  insensitive  to 
content formats, thus allowing information to be read quickly, and are also felt to be 
suitable  for  providing  support  to  diverse  collaborative  work  groups  [16].  However, 
their  reduced  screen  size  and  use  of  virtual  keyboards  or  widgets  for  entering  and 
handling  information  introduces  new  complexities  into  the  person-handheld  interaction 
[17]. 

In  this  paper  we  propose  a  prototype  for  a  face-to-face  meeting  support  system 
based exclusively on the use of handhelds wirelessly connected through a peer-to-peer 
ad-hoc network. This system allows people to meet in any place where the handheld 
connection is able support the various tasks and processes, both individual and collaborative,
 that arise over the life-cycle of a meeting. Its design incorporates the following 
principles: a) Interaction is based exclusively on gestures for managing, organizing 
 and  reviewing  the  notes  made  by  meeting  participants.  Users  are  limited  to 
employing a handheld pen and freehand text or graphics, thus minimizing the number 
of widgets and virtual keyboards; b) Content entered during the meeting is structured, 
whether it be individual or collaborative notes through three-dimensional concept aps, 
thereby  giving  “depth”  to  the  handheld  screen.  In  addition,  the  system  provides  the 
necessary  support  for  group  memory,  minutes,  agenda  organization  and  various 
commitment and voting processes. 

2   Problems of Face-to-Face Meetings 

The most common problems of face-to-face meetings as found in [2], [7], [9] and [18] 
may be characterized in terms of the different meeting stages or life-cycle [18], which 
consists of an implicit sequence of activities that occur before (pre-meeting), during 
and after (post-meeting) any actual meeting. 
−  Pre-meeting:  Non-existence  of  a  work  agenda  or  deficiencies  in  its  construction, 
absence of times assigned for each agenda item. Lack of work methodologies for 
organizing  meeting  attendees’  contributions,  presenting  an  idea  to  the  other  participants,
 contributing and discussing ideas and recording notes. 

−  During  the  meeting:  Absence  of  organization  and  coordination  of  attendees’ 
participation  due  to  the  lack  of  an  individual  or  collaborative  work  area  where 
notes, points of view, ideas and opinions can be shown. Lack of follow-up closely 
based  on  the  agenda.  Discussion  of  irrelevant  matters  and  information  due  to 
absence of agreement mechanisms and the consequent loss of time. Non-existence 
of records of commitments made by attendees. 

 

 

Handheld-Based Electronic Meeting Support 

343 

−  Post-meeting: Inability to carry out a follow-up due to the lack of group memory in 
the form of a record of notes, activities, tasks, progress and conclusions, resulting 
in the loss or forgetting of participants’ contributions. Deficient or non-existent fol-
low-up  of  commitments,  hindering  future  follow-up  action  and  between-meeting 
activities. 

In order to ensure that meetings are effective and productive [2], the system should 
support  the  following  elements:  a)  construction  and  follow-up  of  work  agenda,  b) 
organization and coordination of individual and collaborative work, c) negotiation for 
arriving at agreements, and d) follow-up and management of commitments. 

3   Related Work 

Various analyses have been carried out of both proposed and already-developed EMS 
systems  that  use  freehand  input,  concept  maps  and  especially  handhelds,  as  well  as 
the functionalities offered by handhelds for supporting face-to-face meetings: agenda 
creation, distribution and discussion support; task and processes development support; 
distributed on-screen viewing; individual note-making; and generation of minutes (see 
Table 1). 

The Dolphin project [19] uses PCs connected to a LiveBoard to provide support for 
face-to-face  meetings  and  persons  distributed  among  different  physical  locations. 
Dolphin uses concept maps to link up the different issues dealt with at a meeting, so 
that a given issue can give rise to other sub-issues. Each issue and sub-issue is handled 
through a shared work area, with the option for attendees to make personal and 
private notes in the same system.  

The We-Met project [20] supports face-to-face meetings using tablet PCs for each 
of the participants all of whom are interconnected through a PC. Attendees can work 
in the same virtual work area on their tablet screens, which is shared through the connection 
 with the PC and is freehand input-based. The project’s objectives are (a) to 
facilitate communication between meeting participants, and (b) to facilitate documentation 
of knowledge and information generated by the meeting for easy review. Users 
of this system found that it was necessary to have private work areas where they can 
develop ideas that are not yet ready to be presented to the other attendees.  

The  Pebbles  project  [21],  though  not  conceived  to  be  used  exclusively  for  meetings,
  can  be  used  to  provide  support  to  collaborative  groups  in  various  contexts.  It 
consists  of  applications  that  interconnect  handhelds  through  a  PC.  The  devices  are 
used as though they were PC mice or keyboards. The project’s objective is to mediate 
social interaction techniques between persons through a shared screen. 

RoamWare [10] is a handheld architecture that supports informal face-to-face reunions,
 including those held in such places as corridors. Each handheld can detect and 
interconnect  to  others  located  within  a  limited  space,  while  the  participants  make 
notes  on  their  devices.  These  notes  are  sent  to  a  central  computer  where  they  are 
stored for later distribution. 

Costa et al. [22] have developed the idea of combining handhelds and a PC to explore 
the relationships that may exist between a meeting and these technologies. They 
show that the use of handhelds is neither annoying nor obstructive to the flow of the 
meeting, and suggest the devices be utilized as tools to generate reports, a traditional 

 

344 

G. Zurita and N. Baloian 

technique  for  linking  meeting  processes  to  organizational  ones.  The  authors  of  the 
study  also  attempt  to  improve  meeting  report  generation  by  making  use  of  the  
capacities  handhelds  can  contribute  to  the  EMS  for  managing  individual  and  group 
information. 

Table 1. Comparison of face-to-face meeting support systems using handhelds 

Characteristics of imple-
mented/proposed EMS 

Dolphin We-Met Pebbles RoamWare 


Freehand input based 
Use of concept maps 
Use of handhelds 
Use of PCs 
Wireless network interconnection 

Support for creation, distribution 
and discussion of agenda  
Support for development of 
tasks/processes  
Distributed viewing of tasks and 
processes on screen  
Ability to take individual notes 
Creation of minutes 

√  
√  

√  

√  

√  

√  

  

  

 

  

√  

  

Tablet PC

√  

  

  

√  

√  

  
√  

√  

√  
√  
√  

√  

√  

  

  

  
  

  

  

√  

√  
√  
√  

√  

√  

√  
√  

Costa et 

al. 
  
  

√  
√  
√  

√  

√  
√  

  

  

Antunes 
and Costa 

√  

√  
√  
√  

√  

√  

  

  
  
√  

Antunes & Costa [23] have studied the impact of including handhelds as a support 
to  meetings,  pointing  out  the  important  role  they  can  play  in  managing  individual 
information. The authors note the following requirements: a) creation and distribution 
of an agenda; b) support for the development of the issues on the agenda; c) recording 
of decisions taken; d) inclusion of the foregoing in the minutes for later distribution; 
e)  support  for  typical  meeting  structures;  and  f)  support  for  various  agenda,  issue, 
decision, report and logistics templates. 

Table 1 shows the findings of a comparative analysis of the above-described meeting 
 support  systems.  Particularly  noteworthy  is  that  only  one  system  uses  concept 
maps to support collaborative work (Dolphin), while Antunes and Costa are the only 
ones to propose the creation, distribution and discussion of the agenda. None of the 
systems  provides  any  support  for  negotiations  aimed  at  reaching  agreements  or  for 
commitment follow-up, and most importantly, none use gestures as a solution to the 
restrictions imposed by the small size of the handheld screen.  

4   Design Principles  

The system design principles proposed in this paper that constitute a novel contribution 
compared to other solutions are described below:  
−  Handheld  screens  acquire  greater  depth  through  three-dimensional  concept 
maps. The provision of shared visual spaces may be seen as a facilitator for various 
processes between persons working in groups because of the support it gives to 
externalization.  This  plays  an  important  role  in  the  organization  and  creation  of 
knowledge in the sense that these spaces support the transition from tacit and indi-

 

 

Handheld-Based Electronic Meeting Support 

345 

vidual  knowledge  to  explicit  knowledge.  Shared  visual  spaces  such  as  concept 
maps have been applied in discussion groups [24], design groups and collaborative 
activities. We propose the  use of concept  mapping techniques  for providing support 
to group design of meeting agendas and meeting development as well as group 
memory  handling.  Furthermore,  handheld  screens  can  be  given  greater  depth  by 
virtue of the fact that the explosion of each node implies the generation of a new 
screen on which an aspect specified by the parent node can be worked on, thus resulting 
in the creation of three-dimensional concept maps. The third dimension affords 
the option of overcoming the disadvantage of handhelds’ reduced screen size 
by displaying a new screen for the development of additional aspects. 

that 

these  decrement 

the  amount  of  useful  screen  space 

−  Interface simplicity: Gestures. The design of interfaces for applications that can 
be built for handhelds pose a challenge due to the small size of the screen. Touch 
screens are an existing freehand input-based technique for facilitating communication 
between the user and a handheld, allowing the user to create widgets (buttons 
for actions such as review, insertion, deletion and change of location). Note, however,
 
(see 
http://www.palmsource.com/developers),  a  single  button  using  up  to  10%  of  the 
device’s  screen.  Gestures  are  entered  with  a  pen  through  predetermined  designs, 
with a result that is efficient, powerful and practical [25], albeit some gestures are 
not easily remembered and may be difficult to recognize. Generally speaking, the 
design of a gesture-based interface should incorporate the following three consid-
erations: (a) gestures should be easy to learn and remember, (b) they should be reliably 
recognizable by the system, and (c) users should be continually informed on 
the available options. In addition, a zoom feature allows the user to see the structure 
of the concept maps on the handheld and sounds can be associated as a support 
to the use of gestures. 

5   Prototype Design of HEMS 

The  proposed  prototype,  which  we  will  call  HEMS  (Handheld-Based  Electronic 
Meeting Support), is oriented toward providing support for dealing with the problems 
identified at the end of Section 2. Figure 1 shows the functionalities that HEMS can 
support (double-line rectangles) within the meeting life-cycle, the various gesture and 
concept  map  principles  (ovals)  that  support  the  complete  system,  and  the  support 
components it provides for the individual work space, the group work space, voting, 
and the assignment and monitoring of time periods. 

Since handhelds’ reduced screen size restricts the amount of information that can 
be  displayed,  the  design  of  the  interface  must  be  given  particular  attention  [17]. 
According  to  [26],  one  solution  for  obtaining  effective  interaction  between  the  user 
and  screen  content  is  to  use  pen-based  gestures.  A  pen-based  system  facilitates  the 
use of freehand input and is a natural method of making notes during a meeting [20]. 
Gestures  can  also  support  creative  processes  such  as  brainstorming,  shared  visual 
representations,  collaborative  publishing  of  graphic  designs,  and  visual  sketch 
displays  [24].  Gestures  on  the  screen  will  be  automatically  detected  as  such  and 
interpreted  semantically  by  HEMS.  For  easy  retrieval  and  follow-up  work,  reusable  
 

 

346 

G. Zurita and N. Baloian 

Individual work

space

Group work

space

Voting

Gestures

Meeting
life-cycle

Concept

Maps

Pre-meeting

Meeting

Post-meeting

Between-meetings

Creation of

agenda

Describe

items

Distribute

notes

Review
meeting

Communicate
following stages

Start of
meeting

Development
of meeting

Time

End of
meeting

Follow-up on
commitments

Notify agenda

Review agenda

Agree agenda

Meeting
summary

Actions to be

taken

Negotiation

support

Record of

commitments

collaborative

work

Individual
note-making

Creation of

minutes

Discussion of
meeting items

 

Fig. 1. Support provided by HEMS prototype at the various stages of the system 

materials are stored with the semantic structure. Seen from the users’ perspective, the 
final  goal  would  be  to  reduce  all  necessary  interaction  with  the  Handheld  to  the 
moderating gestures and documentary writing on the screen 

Features such as agenda creation, note-making, commitment assignment, and support 
for voting are implemented using concept maps that allow a hierarchical nesting 
of  any  individual  or  group  issue  to  be  dealt  with.  Kristoffersen  and  Ljungberg  [27] 
show that viewing graphic elements and using concept maps on which users arrive at 
an agreement as to their meaning through explanations help people establish effective 
social interaction for dealing with any given issue. 

The nesting incorporated in concept maps ensures organization, ease of follow-up, 
and  flexibility  of  creation,  modification  and  management  while  at  the  same  time 
avoiding  changes  in  context  due  to  the  three-dimensional  semantic  graphs  provided 
by the maps. As an example, consider Figure 2, in which a person named Ann puts 
(Figure  2a)  forward  three  issues  to  be  dealt  with  at  a  meeting:  a  new  employee,  a 
future  project  and  the  budget.  Once  all  the  participants  (John,  Ann,  Eva,  Tom  and 
Max,  as  shown  at  the  bottom  of  the  handheld  screens)  are  agreed  on  the  “new  em-
ployee”  issue,  one  participant  (Ann  again)  selects  it  using  the  “select  item”  gesture 
and a new blank node appears that is dependant on the issue. If the participants are not 
in agreement on the “budget”, the “delete item” gesture is used. In Figure 2.b, John 
introduces two sub-issues (“how old” and “knowledge”), both of which are part of the 
“new employee” concept.  

To navigate the concept maps, a chosen issue is double-clicked (for example “new 
employee”, Figure 2.a) and its sub-issues are displayed (in this case, “how old” and 
“knowledge”, Figure 2.b). A double click outside of the selected issues will display 
the screen shown in Figure 2.a. The gestures “previous” and “next” are used to navigate 
through a screen or node related to a given concept. The structure of the issues to 
be dealt with (the concept map) can be seen in Figure 2.c. For the voting process, the  
 

 

 

a

Handheld-Based Electronic Meeting Support 

347 

Gestures

b

Gestures

c

Gestures

Gestures

select item

delete item

confirm

next

previous

 

Fig. 2. Screenshots of HEMS and the basic gestures 

gestures “confirm” (agree) and “delete item” (disagree) may be used by each participant 
on a given issue. 

The functionalities of the HEMS system (Figure 1) that facilitate the provision of 
support and mediation for dealing with the phenomena discussed at the end of Section 
2 are described in what follows. 
−  Agenda construction and follow-up. These functionalities include the ability to a) 
facilitate the creation and description of agenda items individually (pre-meeting); 
b) notify agenda and review it as a group (start of meeting); c) review agenda items 
(start of meeting); d) agree upon the agenda based on the issues proposed by each 
participant  in  shared  and  collaborative  fashion,  propose  alternative  issues  to  be 
dealt  with,  and  have  a  voting  component  for  arriving  at  agreements  (start  of 
meeting);  e)  provide  support  for  meeting  follow-up  through  the  assignment  and 
management of estimated time periods for each issue [6], an important factor for 
promoting effectiveness and productivity ([2]) by supplying elapsed time alerts and 
progress indicators on matters being discussed at the meeting. 

−  Organization  and  coordination.  The  use  of  concept  maps  generates  a  natural 
mental  structure  that  ensures  the  participants  remain  focused  on  the  issues  to  be 
dealt with [6]. HEMS supplies a work area for each issue that is to be developed 
individually  or  collaboratively  [20].  It  can  be  used  by  attendees  to  make  handwritten 
notes.  
In the final stage of the meeting, the deep organization of the concept maps a) enables 
the drafting of a meeting summary through the follow-up of the structure, and 
b)  facilitates  the  determination  of  actions  to  be  taken.  Additionally,  in  the  postmeeting 
stage this feature makes it possible to a) distribute each participant’s notes 
as well as those made by the group as a whole, b) review notes and commitments at 
a later time, and c) inform those involved regarding the stages to follow. 
Given that the attendees’ notes were made during the processes of agreeing upon 
an agenda, developing the issues discussed, taking votes, etc., the minutes of the 
meeting  will  be  saved  by  individual  and  group  contribution  for  each  attendee  as 
well as by issue dealt with, including a record of the times associated with each issue.
 In this format, the minutes constitute a memory of the meeting so that the user 

 

348 

G. Zurita and N. Baloian 

may consult them for information at any moment and maintain the links with the 
corresponding issues discussed at other meetings. 

−  Negotiation. HEMS includes a voting tool to support negotiations and discussions, 
allowing attendees to agree upon the issues to be placed on the agenda, those that 
are to be dealt with at the actual meeting and/or the actions to be taken (see voting 
component in Figure 1). The voting system may use any mode of agreement (unanimity,
 simple majority, two-thirds majority, etc.). Because it works through penbased 
gestures, the system provides the necessary flexibility for adapting to various 
“mental scenarios” that may arise. 

−  Commitments.  If  an  attendee  must  carry  out  a  particular  activity  at  some  later 
time, a note is made in the handhelds stating that the activity must be executed by a 
certain deadline and by the person associated  with the  note. The system also ensures 
 the  necessary  functionality  for  sharing  this  information,  thus  allowing  the 
commitment to be tracked by all participants. 

In shared mode, the individual annotations of a given participant can be viewed by 
all in a single work area, and each of them may specify whether or not their notes are 
to be private. Commitments and minutes can be accessed by various criteria such as 
concept maps and issues contained in the agenda, time elapsed before dealing with a 
given issue, or an issue’s position relative to a given participant’s note [20]. 

HEMS is entirely based on a peer-to-peer ad-hoc wireless network. Note that meetings 
typically last 2 to 3 hours, which is less than the useful charge life of currently 
used  handheld  batteries.  Finally,  the  amount  of  information  needed  to  be  stored  is 
relatively small, so that the limits imposed by handhelds’ reduced memory size do not 
constitute a problem. 

6   Conclusions 

The use of handhelds would appear to be an interesting option for coordinating meetings 
that can be held at any time and in any place due to the devices’ ability to make 
notes and share small items of information, their ease of deployment in any collaboration 
 scenario  and  their  ad-hoc  communication  support.  Handhelds  are  also  a  good 
choice  in  that  they  allow  brief,  spontaneous  notes  to  be  expanded  later  into  fuller 
contributions.  In  cases  where  large  amounts  of  data  must  be  inputted,  solutions  involving 
 keyboards  or  other  high  volume  input  devices  are  required  and  handhelds 
would be less applicable.  

However, even in situations where handhelds are appropriate, their reduced screen 
size constitutes a challenge when designing human-handheld and handheld-mediated 
human-human interactions. The system proposed in this paper, founded on two principles 
 aimed  at  improving  these  two  classes  of  interactions,  implements  functionalities 
 that  help  overcome  what  are  recognized  in  the  literature  as  the  most  frequent 
problems  with  meetings.  The  first  principle  is  the  use  of  an  interface  that  is  based 
wherever  possible  on  an  interaction  with  gestures  so  that  widgets  occupying  scarce 
screen space are not needed. The second principle is the application of a simple structure 
to the notes made by meeting participants. This simplifies the communication of 
ideas, and thanks to the tridimensionality of the structure when expanded, each node 
iteratively  increases  the  depth  of  the  screen.  The  structure  must  be  kept  simple  to 

 

 

Handheld-Based Electronic Meeting Support 

349 

ensure it can be easily retained by the mind, a condition that is fulfilled by a hierarchical 
structure. In view of the foregoing, we believe that the tool presented here can 
be an effective support for spontaneous face-to-face meetings, a hypothesis we hope 
to confirm in experiments planned for the near future. 

Acknowledgments. This paper was partially funded by Fondecyt 1050601 and DI - 
Universidad de Chile Nro. I2 04/01-2. Special thanks to Lorena Quezada and Javier 
Martinez. 

References 

1.  Allen,  T.:  Organizational  Structure  for  Product  Development.  Sloan  School  of  Management, 

MIT: Cambridge (2000) 1-24 

2.  Tropman,  J.E.:  Effective  meetings:  Improving  Group  Decision  Making.  Sage  Publications 

(1996) 

3.  Matson, E.: The Seven Signs of Deadly Meetings. Fast Company. 2. April/May (1996) 122 
4.  Mosvick, R., Nelson, R.: We've Got to Start Meeting Like This! A Guide to Successful Business 

Meeting Management. Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman, (1992) 

5.  Cranes, W. T.: Effective Meetings for Busy People: Let's Decide It and Go Home. New York: 

McGraw-Hill Inc. (1980) 

6.  Hayne, S.: The facilitators’ perspective on meetings and implications for group support System. 

Database, 30(4) (1999) 72-91. 

7.  Drew, J.: The 3M Meeting management team. Mac. Graw Hill. (1994) 
8.  Jessup, L., Valacich, J.: Group Support Systems: A New Frontier. New York: MacMillan (1993) 
9.  Nunamaker, J.A., Dennis, A., Valacich J., Vogel, D., George, J.: Electronic Meeting Systems to 

support group work. CACM 34(7) (1991) 40-61 

10.  Wiberg, M.: RoamWare: an integrated architecture for seamless interaction in between mobile 
meetings.  Conference  on  Supporting  Group  Work  archive.  Proceedings  of  the  2001  International 
ACM SIGGROUP (2001) 288-297 

11.  Bergqvist, J., Dahlberg, P., Kristoffersen, S., Ljungberg, F.: Moving out of the meeting room: 
exploring support for mobile meetings. Proceedings of the Sixth European conference on Computer 
supported cooperative work. Copenghagen, Denmark (1999) 81-98 

12.  Hutchins,  E.:  The  Technology  of  Team  Navigation.  In  Galegher,  J.,  Kraut,  R.E.,    Egido,  C. 
(eds.):  Intellec    tual  Teamwork:  Social  and  Technological  Foundations  of  Cooperative  Work. 
Lawrence Earlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ. (1990) 191-221 

13.  Marshall,  C.,  Ruotolo,  C.:  Reading-in-the-Small:  A  Study  of  Reading  on  Small  Form  Factor 

Devices. JCDL’02, Portland, Oregon, USA. (2002) 13-17 

14.  Luff, P., Heath, C.: Mobility in Collaboration. In Proceedings of Computer Supported Collaborative 
Work, CSCW’98. ACM Press (1998) 305-314 

15.  Perry, M. O’hara, K., Sellen, A., Brown, B., Harper, R.: Dealing with mobility: understanding 
access anytime, anywhere. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI), 4(8) 
(2001) 323-347 

16.  Schmidt, A. Lauff, M., Beigl, M.: Handheld CSCW. Workshop on Handheld CSCW at CSCW 

'98, 14 November, Seattle (1998) 

17.  Guerrero, L., Pino, J., Collazos, C., Inostroza, A., Ochoa, S. Mobile Support for Collaborative 
Work. Proceedings of 10th International Workshop on Groupware, CRIWG 2004, LNCS 3198, 
Springer Verlag, San Carlos, Costa Rica, September (2004) 363-375 

 

350 

G. Zurita and N. Baloian 

18.  Bostrom, R., Anson, R., Clawson, V.: Group Facilitation and Group Support Systems. In Group 

Support Systems: A New Frontier. Jessup, L. Valacich, J., (Eds.) (1993) 146-168 

19.  Streitz, N., Geißler, J., Haake, J., Hol, J.: DOLPHIN: Integrated Meeting Support across Local 
and Remote Desktop Environments and LiveBoards in Proceedings of the 1994 ACM conference 
on Computer supported cooperative work, CSCW'94,  ACM (1994) 345-358 

20.  Wolf, C., Rhyne, J.: Communication and Information Retrieval with a Pen-Based Meeting Support 
tool. CSCW Proceedings. ACM (1992) 322-329 

21.  Myers,  B.A.,  Stiel,  H.,  Gargiulo,  R.:  Collaboration  using  multiple  PDAs  connected  to  a  PC. 
Proceedings of the ACM, Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work. (Seattle, WA) 
(1998) 285-294 

22.  Costa, C., Antunes, P., Dias, J.: The Meeting Report Process: Bridging EMS with PDA. Third 
International  Conference  on  Enterprise  Information  Systems,  ICEIS  2001.  Setubal,  Portugal. 
(2001) 821-826 

23.  Antunes, P., Acosta, C.: Handheld CSCW in the Meeting Environment., CRIWG 2002, LNCS 

2440 (2002) 47-60 

24.  Hoppe, U., Gaßner K.: Integrating Collaborative Concept Mapping Tools with Group Memory 
and  Retrieval  Functions.  Proceedings  of  the  Computer  Support  for  Collaborative  Learning 
(CSCL) 2002 Conference (2002) 716-725 

25.  Long, A., Landay J., Rowe L., Michiels, J.: Visual similarity of pen Gestures. In: Proc. of the 

Human Factors in Computing Systems SIGCHI 2000 2(1) (2000) 360-367 

26.  Nicholson,  M.,  Vickers,  P.: Pen-Based  Gestures:  An  Approach  to  Reducing  Screen  Clutter  in 

Mobile Computing. In Proceedings of Mobile HCI 2004 (2004) 320-324 

27.  Kristoffersen, S., Ljungberg, F.: An Empirical Study of How People Establish Interaction: Implications 
 for  CSCW  Sessions  Management  Models.  Proceedings  CHI  99  Conference  on  Human 
Factors in Computing Systems Pittsburg (1999) 1-8 

 

