 

Evaluating a Mobile Emergency Response System 

Cláudio Sapateiro1, Pedro Antunes2, Gustavo Zurita 3, Rodrigo Vogt3,  

and Nelson Baloian4 

1 Systems and Informatics Department, Superior School of Technology,  

Polytechnic Institute of Setúbal, Portugal 

csapateiro@est.ips.pt 

2 Department of Informatics, Faculty of Sciences, 

University of Lisbon, Portugal  

paa@di.fc.ul.pt 

3 Management Control and Information Systems Department, Business School 

Universidad de Chile  

gnzurita@fen.uchile.cl, rodrigovogt@gmail.com  

4 Computer Science Department, Engineering School 

Universidad de Chile 

nbaloian@dcc.uchile.cl  

Abstract. Existing information systems often lack support to crisis and emergency 
situations. In such scenarios, the involved actors often engage in ad hoc 
collaborations necessary to understand and respond to the emerging events. We 
propose  a  collaboration  model  and  a  prototype  aiming  to  improve  the  consistency 
and effectiveness of emergent work activities. Our approach defends the 
requirement to construct shared situation awareness (SA). To support SA, we 
developed a collaborative artifact named situation matrixes (SM), which relates 
different situation dimensions (SD) of the crisis/emergency scenario. A method 
was also developed to construct and evaluate concrete SM and SD. This method 
was applied in two organizations’ IT service desk teams,  which often have to 
deal  with  emergency  situations.  The  target  organizations  found  our  approach 
very relevant in organizing their response to emergencies.  

1   Introduction 

Information Systems (IS) development has been traditionally approached by focusing on 
predefined work models, most of them conceived with efficiency concerns. Nevertheless, 
many  unknown  variables,  both  external  (e.g.,  market  dynamics,  natural  disasters)  and 
internal (e.g., latent problems, emergent work processes or the lack of flexibility in work 
structures), are among the factors that may lead to the lack of support of existing IS when 
facing  unplanned/  unpredicted/unstructured  events.  Such  situations  may  often  scale  to 
crises, defined in [1] as a series of unexpected events causing uncertainty of action, or 
emergencies, when time-pressure is also present.  

In non-routine or unique emergency situations, the use of anticipated protocols may be 
quite  difficult  or  even  impossible  [2].  In  order  to  adapt  to  a  specific  situation,  the  involved 
participants rely heavily on their experience, and strategic decisions must be made 

R.O. Briggs et al. (Eds.): CRIWG 2008, LNCS 5411, pp. 121–134, 2008. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008 

122 

C. Sapateiro et al. 

often lacking full insight about the situation. Information shortage, as well as information 
overload, may lead to an unbalanced response (e.g., overloading some personnel, prioritizing 
less urgent actions, lack of awareness of mutually exclusive tasks).  

Developing  IS  to  support  such  unstructured  scenarios  raises  several  challenges, 
considering  that  work  processes  under  such  conditions  are  characterized  by:  having 
no best structure or sequence; often being distributed; dynamically evolving;  unpredictable 
actors’ roles; and unpredictable contexts [3]. These characteristics challenge 
the traditional IS assumptions regarding predictability and analyzability.  

Our approach to IS support to emergency situations emphasizes the collaborative 
dimension  of  the  emergency  response  rather  that  the  more  traditional  command  & 
control model [4]. The proposed collaboration model is grounded in several principles 
of resilience engineering. Resilience engineering is characterized as a comprehensive 
endeavor  towards  increased  resistance  and  flexibility  when  dealing  with  the  unexpected 
[5]. Resilience engineering should be regarded as an important and innovative 
approach  to  IS  development,  at  least  because  the  traditional  IS  approaches  have  
revealed many limitations regarding emergency scenarios.  

The main organizational failures addressing emergency situations, pointed out in [6], 
may be rooted in a lack of collective awareness of the ongoing situation. Our research 
contributes to the development of shared situation awareness (SA) as a mean to improve 
the  emergency  response.  Our approach  to  SA  relies  upon  a set  of  shared artifacts  that 
may be collaboratively updated on a contingency basis. Considering that in many emergency 
 scenarios  the  involved  actors  may  need  to  operate  in  distributed  locations,  the 
approach is also based on mobile devices (tablet PCs and PDAs).  

The prototype was developed on top of a pen-based application framework developed 
at the University of Chile. Besides handling all communication and collaboration 
 issues,  this  framework  provides  a  very  rich  collection  of  predefined  pen-based 
gestures supporting the creation and manipulation of visual objects.  

Aiming to evaluate our approach in real settings, we conducted experiments with 
two IT service desk teams operating in two different organizations. These teams often 
face situations classified as emergencies; for instance, if a network link or a server is 
down,  it  may  compromise  the  organization’s  work.  In  a  number  of  organizations, 
these situations are overcome without IS support.  

One  fundamental  constraint  of  this  research  was  the  adoption  of  an  adequate 
evaluation method. Groupware evaluation has raised many methodological concerns, 
since  the  adopted  strategies  may  differ  in:  product  maturity  (design,  prototype,  finished 
 product),  time  span  (hours,  weeks,  months,  years),  setting  (laboratory,  work 
context), type of people involved (domain experts, final users, developers), and type 
of  research  (quantitative,  qualitative)  [7].  The  scope  of  the  evaluation  process  may 
also target different dimensions, ranging from the technical dimension (e.g., interoperability,
  connectivity)  to  the  organizational  dimension  (e.g.,  effects  on  tasks  performance,
 processes structure) [8, 9]. Concerning our objectives, several dimensions 
could have been considered:  

1.  Evaluate  the  collaboration  model,  including  its  capability  to  address  emergency 
situations and incorporate the resilience engineering principles.  

2.  Evaluate the situation awareness hypothesis, aiming to improve performance 

in emergency response scenarios, thus focusing on the shared artifacts.  

 

 

 

Evaluating a Mobile Emergency Response System 

123 

3.  Evaluate the prototype usability.  
4.  Evaluate  the  technological  constraints  and  its  implications  to  performance 

(e.g., mobile ad hoc network - MANET issues).  

Of course these dimensions are highly interdependent, thus increasing the difficulties 
 accomplishing  a  comprehensive  evaluation.  Considering  these  difficulties,  we 
established the reasonable goal to only evaluate the first two dimensions.  

In the next section we present some research contributing to this work. Section 3 
describes  our  conceptual  approach.  The  prototype  is  briefly  described  in  section  4. 
Sections 5 and 6 present the details of the evaluation process and the obtained results. 
We  conclude  the  paper  by  making  some  remarks  and  pointing  some  future  work  
directions. 

2   Related Work 

We  may  find  in  the  research  literature  several  projects  addressing  how  to  bring  IS 
operations  back  to  model  behavior  after  deviations  caused  by  unpredicted  events  
[10-12].  The  problem  addressed  by  this  paper  moves  the  research  beyond  this  perspective 
 towards  the  support  to  emergent  work  structures  in  emergency  situations, 
adopting a perspective where work models do not serve to prescribe work processes 
but rather as informational artifacts [13, 14] helping getting the work done. 

Several definitions for SA may be found in the research literature typically referring 
SA as an understanding of the situation elements (people, objects, etc.) and dynamics 
(interactions, events, etc.) One of the most established models organizes SA in 
three levels [15]: 

1.  Perception  produces  Level-1  SA:    the  most  basic  level  of  SA,  providing 
awareness of the multiple situational elements (objects, events, people, systems,
  environmental  factors)  and  their  current  states  (locations,  conditions, 
modes, actions). 

2.  Comprehension produces Level-2 SA: an understanding of the overall meaning 
of the perceived elements. 

3.  Projection  produces  Level-3  SA:  awareness  of  the  likely  evolution  of  the 

situation and possible/probable future states and events. 

The  recent  research  on  team  shared  awareness  highlights  that  teams  need  to  detect 
cues,  remember,  reason,  plan,  solve  problems,  acquire  knowledge,  and  make  decisions 
as an integrated and coordinated unit [16]. The research on SA in the Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) field has developed a functional perspective of 
SA [17-20].  In our research we emphasize the organizational perspective, considering 
the orchestration of activities necessary to construct, manage and use SA. In this regard,
 the team members should not only be able to monitor and analyze SA, but also 
anticipate the SA needs of their colleagues. Hence, [21] define team SA as SA plus 
the mutual adjustment of one and another’s minds as they interact as a team in a specific 
context of action. 

We also adopted the phenomenological perspective of contexts of action, traditionally 
 used  in  social  sciences,  which  regards  SA  as  evolving  dynamically  as  actions 

 

124 

C. Sapateiro et al. 

unfold  [22].  From  an  organizational  perspective,  this  means  that  situated  decision 
making models such as the garbage can [23] are more applicable to our context than 
traditional rational choice models [24].  

Regarding  the  support  to  mobility,  several  collaborative  solutions  have  already 
been  proposed  [25-29].  Although  these  proposals  have  shown  useful  to  support  
specific  collaborative  activities,  they  were  not  designed  to  address  emergency  management.
 Their reuse capability is therefore relatively small.  

3   Conceptual Approach 

As  stated  in  [6],  resilience  is  a  function  of  the  organization’s  awareness.  IS  should 
thus focus on providing SA as a mechanism for efficiently sharing and coordinating 
actions in emergency contexts.  

SA implies an understanding of the entire operating environment and should be built 
by taking advantage on the experience of the involved participants. In our approach, we 
aim to facilitate the externalization of the user’s experience and tacit knowledge, enhancing 
the individual contributions to the overall understanding of the situation (supporting 
the  externalization  knowledge  flow  referred  by  [30]).  This  deference  to  expertise  is  a 
fundamental  resilience  principle  and  is  trained  in  programs  like  Crew  Resource  
Management [31, 32] adopted by aviation and firefighter organizations.  

Considering the Swiss-Cheese Accident Model [33], accidents occur when several 
organizational defense layers are transposed. In our model we address the emergency 
situation by collaboratively constructing layers of defense. Involved actors should be 
able to align and correlate different situation dimensions (SD) of the unfolding events 
and  actions.  We  consider  as  samples  of  SD:  involved  actors,  necessary  actions,  resources 
allocation, goals, etc. For a given application domain, an initial set of relevant 
dimensions  may  be  adopted  and  later  on  dynamically  redefined,  as  the  unplanned 
situation unfolds.  

The  existing  SD  are  correlated  in  an  artifact  named  situation  matrixes  (SM),  expressing 
existing relations among different dimension of the situation. Samples of SM 
are Actions-Actors, Actor-Allocated Resources, Goals-Actions, etc. Despite a possible 
starting set, SM may be dynamically defined. Our specific implementation of the 
SM  was  inspired  by  the  perspective  proposed  in  [34],  which  uses  several  types  of 
matrixes to visualize qualitative data, for instance: concept cluster matrixes, empirical 
matrixes, and temporal or event driven matrixes.  

The SD correlations are specified in the SM as circles, using different sizes and/or 
colors to express the perceived strengths of such relations. Several alternatives may be 
considered to express the semantic meaning of such correlations, but in our approach 
we  leave  the  concrete  semantics  to  be  defined  by  the  application  domain  experts. 
Figure 1 illustrates the proposed collaboration model and SM artifacts.  

The SM artifacts accomplish several goals: support action planning and status reporting;
  and  by  providing  a  shared  integrated  representation  (kind  of  real-time 
dashboard), implement a monitor/feedback mechanism. As the situation evolves, the 
SD may include more items (e.g., more actors involved, more actions proposed), and 
new SD may be created and related in existing or new SM. 

 

 

 

Evaluating a Mobile Emergency Response System 

125 

Fig. 1. Collaboration Model and SM artifacts 

 

4   Developed Prototype 

As stated earlier, mobility  may constitute a requirement in emergency  management. 
The developed prototype operates in Tablet PCs and PDAs (see figure 2). The system 
is  a  full  peer-to-peer  application.  This  means  that  every  user  runs  exactly  the  same 
application and shares data using the ad-hoc network. Using multicast messages, the 
application automatically finds other partners and establishes a reliable TCP link with 
them for transmitting data. 

 

Fig. 2. Prototype a. Tablet PC b. PDA 

 

A key concern while developing the prototype was requiring a minimal overhead 
to operate the SM. SM are easily created by drawing an half rectangle (figure 2a(1)). 
The SM may be populated with SD as shown in figure 2b. To specify the contents of 
the matrix, it should be “expanded” by a double clicking on the rectangle. To create a 
new  column,  the  user  has  to  double  click  on  the  label  of  the  columns  (Figure  3a). 
After  this,  the  user  enters  the  header  text  for  the  column  as  shown  in  figure  3b.  A 
similar procedure is used for editing rows (figure 3c).  

 

126 

C. Sapateiro et al. 

Fig. 3. Prototype a-b. Column creation c. Row creation 

 

 
Fig. 4. a. Correlations editing; b. Navigation: Scrolling; c. Navigation: Zooming 

Figure 4a shows a user marking a relationship between SD items. This relationship 
is expressed with a dot of a certain dimension, with bigger dots meaning more importance.
  Figures  4b-c  illustrates  the  navigation  capabilities  (scrolling  and  zooming) 
through the SM artifact.  

5   Evaluation 

We have considered several alternatives to evaluate the collaboration model. Typical 
evaluation  strategies  include  computer  simulations,  field  methods  and  usability  inspections.
 Although field methods allow capturing more realistic data, they could be 
difficult  to  settle  in  our  case  for  several  reasons:  time  investment,  scenario  setting, 
associated costs and prototype maturity.  

The computer simulations allow, to some extent, to overcome some of these problems. 
We  may  find  in  the  literature  different  approaches  to  computer  simulations  in  our  research 
context, from fully automated agent–based simulations [35] to hybrid approaches 
including humans in the loop [36]. Fully automated agent–based simulations rely heavily 
on modeling (situation constrains, information flows, actors behaviors, etc.) A combination 
of computer simulations with humans in the loop may be accomplished with game 
playing in virtual scenarios. But despite the validity of these options, they all rely to some 
extent in pre-defined situations. Our work focuses on supporting human behavior in nonpredicted 
 scenarios,  emerging  in  real  time  and  from  the  involved  actor’s  experience, 
which does not seem adequate to the computer simulation approach. 

 

 

Evaluating a Mobile Emergency Response System 

127 

Usability inspection techniques are  much  less costly than  field  methods and they 
can  often  be  used  earlier  and  more  frequently  in  the  development  cycle.  However, 
since these techniques are not used in the actual work context, some researchers state 
that it is unclear whether the usability information they provide is valid for real-world 
contexts. In [37], the authors discuss that it is possible to integrate usability inspection 
techniques with work scenarios, jointly constructed by domain experts, and that these 
techniques  may  lead  to  results  comparable  to  the  ones  obtained  from    field  studies. 
We based our evaluation method in the combination of the inspection technique with 
the scenario based approach [38-40]. 

Our evaluation method consisted in four steps. We started by conducting a set of 
individual semi-structured interviews to IT service desk team members to present the 
problem and understand its relevance in the application domain. We also jointly analyzed 
 a  set  of  consequence  scenarios  aiming  to  understand  which  were  considering 
realistic emergency situations and actual work practices. These interviews were audio 
recorded for future reference and analysis.  

In the second evaluation step we administrated a questionnaire to each team member 
to identify the key requirements of collaboration support in emergency situations. 
The  third  evaluation  step  concerned  the  realization  of  a  workshop  (also  filmed  for 
future reference) with all team members, where we presented the collaboration model 
and  a  paper  prototype.  The  paper  prototype  allowed  focusing  the  evaluation  on  the 
model, discarding interference of possible usability and technological issues.  

Table 1. Evaluation Methodology 

Step 

Technique 

Goals 

•  Introduce the support of unstructured activities problem. 
•  Perceive the relevance of such problem in the IT service 

desk application domain. 

•  Perceive  actual  emergency 

situations  and  work  

practices. 

•  Rate  the  set  of  proposed  requirements  to  address  

unstructured work activities 

•  Introduce the collaboration model and prototype. 
•  Discuss its usage in a real scenario. 
•  Collect possible SD and SM 
•  Evaluate 
perceived 

effectiveness 

the 

the  
the  collaboration  model  and  

of 

1. 

2. 

3. 

Semi-structured 

interviews 

(audio recorded) 

Questionnaire 1 

Workshop 
(filmed) 

4. 

Questionnaire 2 

implementation  of 
prototype. 

 
Once all participants were familiarized with this approach, we presented the prototype 
in more detail and discussed its usage. Finally, a second questionnaire was administrated 
to evaluate the perceived implementation of the discussed requirements; 
this constituted the fourth step of our evaluation. Table 1 outlines the various steps of 
the evaluation method and clarifies the respective goals.  

Conducted interviews were structured around the topics summarized in table 2. 

 

128 

C. Sapateiro et al. 

Table 2. Interviews structure 

Interviews - Discussed Topics 

 

1.  Which situations may be described as emergencies 
2.  Current preventive practices 
3.  Current diagnosis practices 
4.  Current registration practices 
5.  Current recovery formal procedures 
6.  Current  recovery informal procedures 
7.  Current communication schemas 
8.  Existing performance metrics 
9.  Priority  near 
vulnerabilities) 

improvements 

future 

(address  current 

identified  

Table 3. Requirements under evaluation 

Requirements 

Influence Area 

Communication support through shared artifacts 
Transitions between individual and team work 
Coordination support 
Facilitate in finding collaborators 
Facilitate in establish context 
Facilitate situation (specific issues) monitoring 
Minimal overhead work demand 
Mobile end device availability 
Assist situation understanding 
Perceived who is involved 
Assist situation size up 
Assists (overall) situation representation 
Knowledge externalization support 
Knowledge transfer support 
Incident handling documentation 
Improvement in diagnosis time 
Improvement in recovery time 
Number of coupled incidents simultaneously  

Groupware  
Collaboration  
Heuristics 

Situation  
Awareness 

Knowledge  
Management 

Performance 

Nº 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 

attended 

 
Our evaluation method received several influences from different evaluation methodologies.
 From the groupware studies, we considered the heuristics proposed by the 
mechanics of collaboration [19, 37], which were developed to evaluate shared workspaces.
 Since our claims consider externalization of tacit knowledge and evaluation of 
team performance, we also considered the works from [41] and [42]. Finally, we also 

 

 

Evaluating a Mobile Emergency Response System 

129 

considered  the  situation  awareness  evaluation  techniques  proposed  by  [16].  The  
Table 3 summarizes the considered requirements for evaluation. 

5.1   Conducted Experiments  

In this section we present the outcomes of the experiments conducted in the two IT 
service  desks.  The  experiments  involved  two  teams  of  IT  support  in  two  different 
organizations. The first team was constituted by three senior and two junior members. 
The second team had the chief, one senior and one junior member. 

We present bellow a brief summary of the  main topics discussed in the interviews. 
Regarding the critical incidents, the most serious cases reported were related with server 
failures (in which the more frequent problem is the disk failure) and connectivity losses 
in some network segments (that may be due to switches’ firmware problems) compromising 
a wide variety of services. It was also reported that more untypical problems may 
occur and lead to emergency situations, “[…] like a flood in the basement where some of 
the equipment is situated […]” The existing preventive practices rely heavily in monitoring 
the active network elements trough a control panel fed by SNMP messages, where 
alerts are displayed and emailed to the technicians. Also, several equipments are under 
 SLA  agreements  with  suppliers  and  a  spare  stock  exists.  Actual  diagnosis  and 
recovery practices rely heavily in the field experience of each team member and the 
fact that they all know the intervention domains of each one (e.g., some team members 
address Linux and others Windows problems).  

The collaboration is essentially supported by meetings, phone calls and chat tools. 
Despite the existence of a trouble ticket software, it is only used (sometimes) for an 
incident opening and some (few) occasional post mortem annotations to close it. The 
reported  main  concerns  regard  documenting  the  intervention  process,  to  facilitate 
future  interventions  and  knowledge  transfer.  Considering  these  teams  rely  heavily 
upon  experience,  the  junior  members  are  often  less  performing.  A  number  of  other 
vulnerabilities were identified that could lead to critical situations; for instance, not all 
equipments  have  a  spare  stock  or  SLA  coverage,  and  overcoming  this  situations  is 
done  by  ad  hoc  measures  and  temporary  workarounds  that,  once  more,  are  highly 
informal and experience dependent. Also, the possible abandon of the team by a senior 
member may dramatically decrease the capacity to handle some incidents due to 
knowledge and collaboration losses. 

In the second evaluation step, the IT service desk  members answered to the  first 
questionnaire,  rating  the  relevance  of  several  requirements  to  support  unstructured 
work activities. The ratings were done in the scale: 1 - Not perceived as important, 2 - 
Less important, 3 - Important and 4 - Very important. 

The questionnaire results yield that requirement 2 was not perceived as important. 
Requirements 12, 13 and 15 were rated from Less Important to Very Important. And 
all other requirements were rated either Important or Very Important. A more detailed 
analysis of the results in conjunction with the recorded interviews yield the following 
considerations: Knowledge transfer and incident documentation revealed Very Important 
to the team leaders; situation representation and knowledge externalization support 
revealed Important to the junior technicians.  

Table  4,  provides  a  description  of  the  scenario  collaboratively  constructed  in  the 

workshops. 

 

130 

C. Sapateiro et al. 

Table 4. Workshop scenario description 

Scenario 

 
“From  several  rooms,  were  reported  the  lost  of  network  connectivity.
 Some technicians were notified by email, while others received 
several  complaints  by  phone.  The  senior  technician  that  received 
some of this complaints suspects from the central switch located on 
the main building.”  

 
How  the  proposed  approach  may  help  in  coordinating, diagnosis 

and recovery actions? 

 

 
From the discussions that took place in both  workshops, the highly informal and 
unstructured work practices were obvious to both teams. The courses of action vary 
according  to  the  involved  actors  and  some  discussions  took  place  on  the  more  efficient 
ways to address this problem. A set of SD and respective SM were drafted in the 
paper prototypes. Figure 5 shows the paper prototypes used in the workshop sessions 
and the PDA prototype being operated. 

 

Fig. 5. Prototype a. paper prototype b. PDA prototype 

 

 

 

Finally,  the  results  from  the  last  questionnaire  confirmed  that  the  proposed  approach 
was perceived as aligned with the requirements that were considered relevant. 
But some  further considerations are  worth  made: SM should be easily reused and a 
global  representation  of  the  situation  (e.g.,  with  all  existing  SD  and  which  of  them 
correlate)  would  be  much  appreciated.  Regarding  the  implementation,  some  notes 
about navigating the existing SM were made to ease the use of correlations. 

6   Discussion 

It was possible to confirm in our experiments that, when facing emergency scenarios, 
the formalized procedures either do not exist or do not apply to the particular situations.
 The technicians’ experience may dictate the set of actions necessary to inspect 

 

 

Evaluating a Mobile Emergency Response System 

131 

or recover some components, to involve specific actors with specific knowledge, etc. 
But  many  of  these  issues  rely  tacitly  and  distributed  on  the  team  members,  which 
constitutes an additional difficulty when coordinating their actions. At the end of each 
workshop  both  teams  reported  that  these  sessions  revealed  to  them  what  they  were 
already  suspicious  about:  the  individuals’  tacit  knowledge  and  experience  strongly 
conditions  the  team’s  efficiency.  The  issue  was  not  completely  new  and  they  were 
trying to address it by compiling a set of major guidelines to externalize and optimize 
the  use  of  such  knowledge.  But  due  to  the  lack  of  time  for  this  task,  an  interesting 
feature of the prototype would be to generate such knowledge from the correlations 
expressed in the SM.  

Additionally, since the actions needed to overcome emergency situations may include 
several dislocations to different physical spaces/buildings, communication and mobility 
constitute key requirements to maintain shared SA among the distributed team. 

As  a  result  of  the  workshop  sessions,  a  set  of  specific  SD  was  proposed:  Equipments,
  Actors,  Locations,  Actions  and  Activities,  which  should  be  correlated  in  the 
following suggested SM: 

1.  Actions-Steps,  detailing  operational  activities  (e.g.,  check  router  X,  reboot 

switch Y).  

2.  Actors-Steps, defining responsibilities. 
3.  Equipment-Actors,  expressing  the  persons  responsible  for  the  equipment 
(e.g., who is empowered to activate a supplier warranty, who is habilitated to 
inspect a Linux server or a specific service). 

4.  Equipments-Locations, allowing team members (mostly junior) to know the 
equipment  locations  (e.g.,  main  gateway  of  building  C6  is  located  in  room 
6.3.0.1). 

Finally,  regarding  the  evaluation  method,  some  considerations  are  also  worth 
made. The first interview revealed crucial to establish a common ground for a richer 
problem discussion. The paper prototype revealed a good choice to support the discussions 
about emergency scenarios. Since it did not constrain users regarding usability 
issues, it focused the discussions on: 1) the SD and SM necessary to address the 
emergency scenarios; 2) the  semantic  meanings of the elicited SM relations; and 3) 
the collaboration model to operate both SD and SM as shared artifacts. 

7   Future Work 

Besides addressing the various suggestions emerging from the evaluation process, we 
are  also  considering  studying  the  timeliness  of  the  situation  awareness  elements. 
Timeliness  (recent,  evolving,  outdated,  etc.)  may  be  fundamental  to  further  develop 
SA, since outdated information may considerably degrade SA. But the dependence on 
explicit user declarations constitutes an overhead work that should be, whenever possible,
 avoided. We are studying a pulling strategy to handle timeliness: 1) when users 
input information, a deadline is also introduced (e.g., valid for the next 15 min) and 
when this expires users are prompted to report information validity; 2) if no deadline 
is introduced, then the specified correlation will incrementally became more visually 
transparent as time goes by. 

 

132 

C. Sapateiro et al. 

We are also exploring the integration of our approach with the IT Infrastructure Library 
(ITIL) framework in order to support other organizational levels involved in the 
different  phases  of  the  emergency  life  cycle  management.  To  accommodate  the  required 
service levels and promote the IT infrastructure and business processes alignment,
  ITIL  defines  five  processes:  Incident  Management,  Problem  Management, 
Configuration  Management,  Change  Management,  and  Release  Management.  These 
processes are related with each other (e.g. incident management may fire a request for 
change – RFC handled under change management process responsibility) and share a 
set of ITIL objects (e.g. incidents, problems, RFCs). Our approach to SA regarding 
the  collaborative  editing  of  shared  artifacts  encompassing  relations  among  situation 
entities could be extended to expose the relations among ITIL objects and processes 
tracking both functional and hierarchical escalation.  
 
Acknowledgements. This paper was partially supported by: the Portuguese Foundation 
for Science and Technology, Project FCT (PTDC/EIA/67589/2006) and Fondecyt 
1085010.  

References 

1.  ESSAY. Enhanced Safety through Situation Awareness Integration in training. In: European 
Community ESSAY project, Contract No GRD1-1999-10450 (2000) 

2.  Bruinsma, G., Hoog, R.d.: Exploring protocols for multidisciplinary disaster response using 
adaptative workflow simulation. In: ISCRAM (2006) 

3.  Markus, M.L., Majchrzak, A., Gasser, L.: A design theory for systems that support emergent 
knowledge processes. In: MIS Quaterly (2002) 

4.  Trainor, J.E.: Searching for a system: Multi-organizational coordination in the september 

11th world trade center and rescue response. In: Sociology, Delware (2004) 

5.  Hollnagel, E., Woods, D.D.: Resilience Engineering Precepts. A. Publishing (2006) 
6.  McManus, S., et al.: Resilience Management: A framework for Assessing and Improving 

the resilience of organizations (2007), http://www.resorgs.org.nz/ 

7.  Herskovic, V., et al.: Evaluation Methods for Groupware Systems. In: Haake, J.M., Ochoa, 
S.F., Cechich, A. (eds.) CRIWG 2007. LNCS, vol. 4715, pp. 328–336. Springer, Heidelberg 
(2007) 

8.  Gauducheau,  N.,  Soulier,  E.,  Lewkowicz,  M.:  Design  and  evaluation  of  activity  modelbased 
 groupware:  methedological  issues.  In:  14th  International  Workshops  on  Enabling 
TEchnologies: Infrastructure for collaborative enterprise (WETICE). IEEE Computer Society,
 Los Alamitos (2005) 

9.  Vyhmeister,  R.,  Mondelo,  P.R.,  Novella,  M.:  Towards  a  Model  for  Assessing  Workers 
Risks Resulting from the Implementation of Information and Communication Systems and 
Technologies. Wiley InterScience, Hoboken (2006) 

10.  Dourish,  P.,  et  al.:  Freeflow:  Mediating  between  representation  and  action  in  workflow 

systems. In: CSCW, USA (1996) 

11.  Bernstein, A.: How can cooperative work tools support dynamic group processes? Bridging 
the specifity frontier. In: CSCW (2000) 

12.  Mourão,  H.,  Antunes,  P.:  Supporting  effective  unexpected  exceptions  handling  in  workflow 
management systems. In: SAC, Seoul, korea (2007) 

13.  Suchman, L.: Plans and Situated Actions: The problem of human-machine communication. 

Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1987) 

 

 

Evaluating a Mobile Emergency Response System 

133 

14.  Gasson, S.: A social action model of situated information systems design. The Data Base 

for Advances in Information Systems 30(2) (1999) 

15.  Endsley,  M.:  Toward  a  theory  of  situation  awareness  in  dynamic  systems.  Human  Factors 
37(1), 32–64 (1995) 

16.  Salmon, P., et al.: Situation Awareness measurment: A review of applicability for C4i enviorments 
(2004) 

17.  Storey,  M.-A.D.,  Cubranic,  D.,  German,  D.:  On  the  Use  of  Visualization  to  Support 
Awareness  of  Human  Activities  in  Software  Development:  A  Survey  and  a  Framework 
(2004) 

18.  Neale,  D.C.,  Carroll,  J.M.,  Rosson,  M.B.:  Evaluating  Computer-Supported  cooperative 

work: Models and frameworks. In: CSCW (2004) 

19.  Gutwin, C., Greenberg, S.: A descriptive framework of workspace awareness for real time 

groupware. In: CSCW (2002) 

20.  Bolstad, C.A., Endsley, M.R.: Shared displays and team performance. In: Human Performance,
 Situation Awareness and Automation (2000) 

21.  Shu,  Y.,  Futura,  K.:  An  inference  method  of  team  situation  awareness  based  on  mutual 

awareness. Cognition, Technology & Work 7, 272–287 (2005) 

22.  Borges,  M.R.S.,  et  al.:  Groupware  system  design  the  context  concept.  In:  Shen,  W.-m., 
Lin,  Z.,  Barthès,  J.-P.A.,  Li,  T.-Q.  (eds.)  CSCWD  2004.  LNCS,  vol. 3168,  pp.  45–54. 
Springer, Heidelberg (2005) 

23.  Cohen, M.D., March, J.G., Olsen, J.P.: A  Garbage Can Model of Organizational Choice 

Administrative Science Quarterly 17(1), 1–25 (1972) 

24.  Flin, R.: Sittin in the Hot Seat, Leaders and Teams fo Critical Incident Management. John 

Willey & Sons, Chichester (1996) 

25.  André, P., Antunes, P.: SaGISC: A Geo-Collaborative System. In: de Vreede, G.-J., Guerrero,
  L.A.,  Marín  Raventós,  G.  (eds.)  CRIWG  2004.  LNCS,  vol. 3198,  pp.  175–191. 
Springer, Heidelberg (2004) 

26.  Guerrero, L.A., Fuller, D.: A Pattern System for the Development of Collaborative Applications.
 Group Decision and Negotiation 43(7), 457–467 (2001) 

27.  Muñoz,  M.A.,  et  al.:  Context-aware  mobile  communication  in  hospitals.  IEEE  Computer 
36(9), 38–46 (2003) 

28.  Zurita, G., Baloian, N.: Handheld Electronic Meeting Support. In: Fukś, H., Lukosch, S., 
Salgado, A.C. (eds.) CRIWG 2005. LNCS, vol. 3706, pp. 341–350. Springer, Heidelberg 
(2005) 

29.  Neyem,  A.,  Ochoa,  S.F.,  Pino,  J.A.:  Designing  Mobile  Shared  Workspaces  for  Loosely 
Coupled  Workgroups.  In:  Groupware:  Design,  Implementation,  and  Use,  pp.  173–190. 
Springer, Heidelberg (2007) 

30.  Nonaka, I., Takeuchi, H.: The knowledge-creating company. Oxford University Press, Oxford 
(1995) 

31.  Helmereich, R.L., Merrit, A.C., Wilhelm, J.A.: The evolution of Crew Resource management 
Training in commercial Aviation. International Journal of Aviation Psychology 9(1), 
19–32 (1999) 

32.  Tippet, J.: Crew Resource Management Manual - A positive change for the  fire service. 

I.A.o.F. Chiefs (2002), http://www.iafc.org/ 

33.  Reason, J.T.: Managing the risks of organizational accidents. Ashgate, Aldershot (1997) 
34.  Miles,  M.B.,  Huberman,  A.M.:  Qualitative  data  analysis.  Sage  Publications,  Thousand 

Oaks (1994) 

35.  Johnson, C.W.: Using evacuation simulations to ensure the safety and security of the 2012 

olimpic venues. Safety science 46(2), 302–322 (2008) 

 

134 

C. Sapateiro et al. 

36.  McGrath,  D.,  McGrath,  S.P.: Simulation  and  Network-Centric  Emergency  Response.  In: 

Interservice/Industru Training, Simulation and Education (I/ITSEC) (2005) 

37.  Steves, M.P., et al.: A comparison of usage evaluation and inspection methods for assessing 
groupware usability (2001) 

38.  Carroll,  J.M.:  Making  Use:  scenario-based  design  of  human-computer  interactions.  MIT 

Press, Cambridge (2000) 

39.  Haynes, S., Purao, S., Skattebo, A.: Situating evaluation in scenarios of use. In: CSCW. 

ACM, New York (2004) 

40.  Stiermerling, O., Cremers, A.: The use of cooperation scenarios in the design and evaluation 
of a CSCW system. IEEE Transaction on Software Engineering (1999) 

41.  Vizcaino, A., et al.: Evaluating collaborative applications froma  knowledge  management 
approach.  In:  14th  IEEE  International  Workshops  on  Enabling  Technologies:  Infrastructure 
for collaborative entreprise WETIC 2005 (2005) 

42.  Baeza-Yates, R., Pino, J.: Towards formal evaluation of collaborative work and its application 
to information retrieval. Information Research 11(4), 271 (2006) 

 

 

