Practice of Skills for Reading Comprehension in Large

Classrooms by Using a Mobile Collaborative

Support and Microblogging

Gustavo Zurita1, Nelson Baloian2(✉), Oscar Jerez3, and Sergio Peñaﬁel2

1 Department of Information Systems and Management Control, Faculty of Economics

and Business, Universidad de Chile, Diagonal Paraguay 257, Santiago, Chile

2 Department of Computer Sciences, Universidad de Chile, Beaucheﬀ 851, Santiago, Chile

gzurita@fen.uchile.cl

3 Economics and Business Faculty, Teaching and Learning Centre, Universidad de Chile,

{nbaloian,spenafie}@dcc.uchile.cl

Diagonal Paraguay 257, Santiago, Chile

ojerez@fen.uchile.cl

Abstract.  Reading  comprehension  is  essential  for  students,  because  it  is  a
predictor of their academic or professional success, however, it is challenging for
many students, even more if they are part of large classrooms. This paper presents
a work which uses Design-Based Research with the purpose of combining theo‐
ries, methods and techniques of the educational sciences to design a collaborative
learning  activity  including  peer  evaluation  to  develop  the  skills  of  reading
comprehension, oral and written communication. It also presents an application
for iPads supporting teacher and students performing this activity. The most rele‐
vant contributions of the proposed design are two: (1) teachers can in real time
automatically conﬁgure the members of the work teams using 3 diﬀerent criteria:
random, individual performance hitherto achieved by the student achieved in
previous stages of the same activity, or the learning styles of each student prefers;
and (2) the prior calibration of an evaluation rubric in order to ensure the quality
of the application of the peer evaluation method in order to grade the answers
students produce to an individual reading comprehension test. In addition, other
methods and techniques are incorporated, such as: monitoring students’ perform‐
ance in real time; active learning based on peer instruction to support the strategy
of reading comprehension implemented.
Keywords: Reading comprehension · Large classrooms · Collaborative learning

1

Introduction

Reading comprehension is an essential ability for students at any level, because it is a
predictor  of  their  future  academic  or  professional  success,  [1].  However,  reading
comprehension is challenging for many students, who struggle in reading due to having
diﬃculty with it [2]. Research suggests that the use of collaborative activities supported
by  appropriate  technology  [3,  4],  can  help  to  improve  students’  reading  skill  by

© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
C. Gutwin et al. (Eds.): CRIWG 2017, LNCS 10391, pp. 81–94, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-63874-4_7

82

G. Zurita et al.

supporting various of the activities involved in the required learning activities, such as
delivering content, support students’ practice, and introduce the level of participation,
guidance and motivation needed in order to become successful in reading comprehen‐
sion [2, 5, 6]. After all, most of today’s students are digital natives; thus it would be
natural for them to use technology as a tool to promote their engagement and achieve‐
ment during reading comprehension.

On the other hand, large classrooms are a fact at any educational level, bringing
disadvantages regarding attention, discipline, and learning [7]. In such situations, tech‐
nological tools which allow collecting students’ answers, (i.e. a classroom responder
system) to problems or questions proposed by the teacher, are one of the most used
technique to give interactive feedback by the teacher to their students, [8].

This paper presents a learning activity whose design requirements are based on vali‐
dated learning methodologies which aims at improving Reading Comprehension skills
of the students, supported by a technological tool named RedCoApp (described in detail
in Sect. 3). The learning activity can be performed in large classrooms, using a method
which collects the answers using technology which collects the answers of at least 60
students. The learning activity has been designed with the purpose of developing in
students  the  skills  of  reading  comprehension,  oral  and written  communication,  and
teamwork. The RedCoApp application (described in Sect. 3) has been implemented with
JavaScript,  HTML5  and  libraries  that  allow  it  to  run  in  any  browser  of  a  desktop
computer or mobile devices (iPad, SmartPhones) that are connected to the Internet.

The research method used was Design-Based Research [9], Which is characterized
by being: (1) Pragmatic: the central objective corresponds to the design of eﬀective
learning activities based on learning theories. Design-based research reﬁnes both theory
and practice. The value of theory is appraised by the extent to which principles inform
and improve practice. (2) Grounded: Design is theory-driven and grounded in relevant
research, theory and practice; conducted in real-world settings and the design process
is embedded in, and studied through, design-based research. (3) Interactive, iterative,
and ﬂexible: designers are involved in the design processes and work together with
participants. Processes are an iterative cycle of analysis, design, implementation, and
redesign. (4) Integrative: Mixed research methods are used to maximize the credibility
of ongoing research. Methods vary during diﬀerent phases as new needs and issues
emerge and the focus of the research evolves. And (5) Contextual: The research process,
research ﬁndings, and changes from the initial plan are all documented. Research results
are connected with the design process and the setting.

The diﬀerence between Design-Based Research and applied research in engineering
or exact sciences areas is that in their “design”, “experimentation” and “transformation”
processes,  there  are  overlaps  and  relationships  between  them,  rather  than  conceive
results of each process as products bound to their environment and previously estab‐
lished  objectives.  The  Design-Based  Research  method  relates  experimentation  and
design through feedback cycles, in order to construct eﬀective learning activities that
the study of complex education systems require, [10].

The content of this article is organized as follows. Section 2 explains the relevant
theories, methods and techniques used as design requirements for the reading compre‐
hension activity. Speciﬁcally, they detail: (a) a learning support technology to be used

Practice of Skills for Reading Comprehension in Large Classrooms

83

in large classrooms (a Classroom Response System), (b) the advantages of using short
messages, (c) real-time monitoring techniques by the teacher regarding the level of
progress  of  the  students,  (d)  learning  theories  and  methods  based  on  collaborative
learning, (e) peer instruction and active learning, (f) techniques for conﬁguring work
team members, and (g) methods of peer evaluation among the students themselves.
Section  3  details  the  design  of  the  reading  comprehension  activity,  along  with  the
description  of  the  RedCoApp  support  application.  Finally,  Sect.  4  describes  the
following stages of our work, and the most relevant contributions of the proposed design:
(a) teachers can in real time automatically conﬁgure the members of the work teams
using  3  diﬀerent  criteria:  random,  individual  performance  hitherto  achieved  by  the
student achieved in previous stages of the same activity and (b) the prior calibration of
an evaluation rubric in order to ensure the quality of the application of the peer evaluation
method in order to grade the answers students produce to an individual reading compre‐
hension test, along with the description of the following stages.

2 Theories, Methods and Techniques to Support Learning
2.1 Classroom Response Systems in Large Classrooms
Nowadays, large classrooms are a fact at any educational level, bringing drawbacks
regarding  students’  attention,  discipline,  and  learning,  [7].  Attempts  to  overcome
common problems of lectures in large classes include introducing learning activities like
recitation sections, case study teaching in labs, peer instructions, and the use of tech‐
nology that allows to capture the students’ answers. They are usually named Classroom
Response Systems (CRS) [8]. Collecting students’ answers introduce positives experi‐
ences by using interactive feedback systems that transform the traditionally passive
classroom into an interactive experience, [8].

The popularity of CRS technologies has increased in large classrooms as a means to
improve engagement and motivation, feedback to understanding, improve participation,
to be a scaﬀold of collaborative learning [11, 12], and enhance learning [13]. It is a
powerful and ﬂexible tool for teaching, and has been used in a variety of subjects with
students of almost any level of academic training, [11]. CRS change the student feelings
of being disconnected in large classrooms [7], and changing the classroom traditional
format of a lecture-style to let teachers provide feedback to the student and vice-versa
as to how well a concept is understood.

According to [14], four diﬀerent CRS-type technologies have been applied in large
classrooms to improve classroom learning: (1) low-cost tools such as hands, ﬂashcards,
color cards, or whiteboards to give their responses; (2) instant response devices with
numeric keypads, interconnected by hard-wired equipment; (3) wireless radio frequency
or infrared devices; and (4) wireless interconnected systems that use desktop or mobile
devices to collect students’ answers. CRS can be used with many styles of questions,
and new technologies allow other formats than multiple-choice questions, [15]. The only
“rule” for question design is that each question’s structure and content should reﬂect
speciﬁc learning goals. Questions may have a single correct answer or be designed
without any “right” answer in order to encourage debate and discussion. Furthermore,

84

G. Zurita et al.

there are positive eﬀects of CRS on student’s high-level cognitive abilities: critical
thinking, problem solving, metacognition, CRS can be applied for immediate feedback,
interactive feedback, classroom monitoring, peer instruction, equal participation, and
formative assessment, [16].

Based on what has been mentioned in this section, and considering that the number
of students where the reading comprehension activity will be applied is large (at least
60 students), the RedCoApp application will be of the CRS type. We consider that a
CRS adequately supports the implementation of the reading comprehension strategy
(described in the next section) consisting of the execution of a sequence of stages. Each
stage requires students to perform tasks that yield speciﬁc intermediate results. Each
intermediate result will be collected and managed by RedCoApp, to be arranged as
relevant information to be analyzed by the teacher, in a simple and easy to operate
computational interface. The result of the analysis of the information will allow the
teacher to make decisions such as: provide feedback to his students, set up work teams,
or continue with the next stage.

2.2 Reading Comprehension
Students who use reading comprehension strategies (such as prediction, think-aloud,
text structure, visual representation of text, key words selection, etc.), improve their
understanding of the message read, identify the essential and relevant message of the
text, and/or are able to express opinions [1]. The strategy of selecting 3 to 5 key words
(KW) or main ideas of the text [6, 17] consists of following a series of elementary
stages that the teacher should manage: (1) The teacher provides a texts to be read and
establish the purpose (objective) of what is to be read, which is also known as the
detonating factor; (2) students select the relevant KWs and justify them by means of
brief comments corresponding to annotations providing justifications that support the
achievement of the purpose of what is being read; (3) students make connections
between KW; and (4) students examine and reflect on the KW and its associated brief
comments in order to finally respond to the purpose established in the initial stage.
If  in  addition,  steps  2  to  4  mentioned  above  can  be  carried  out  collaboratively
between 2 to 5 students. In this way the understanding of what they are reading is favored
through conversations, exchange of various opinions or points of view, and discussion
on the selected KWs and their comments, [1, 6]. Brief comments facilitate the exchange
of information, discussion and convergence among students.

According to  the  above,  the  RedCoApp  design  that  we propose  (see  Sect. 3),
besides considering the implementation of a reading comprehension strategy based
on the selection of KW, will use: (1) the advantages of the use of short messages
(microblogging); (2) real-time monitoring to manage the follow-up of the elemen‐
tary stages; And (3) the incorporation of activities of collaborative learning between
2 to 5 students who will work together in the selection process of the KW. Although
students will work collaboratively in the process of identifying KW and its associ‐
ated comments, each individual student will have to submit an answer regarding the
purpose of the reading comprehension activity. By making each student responsible,

Practice of Skills for Reading Comprehension in Large Classrooms

85

the achievement of the detonating factor or purpose associated with reading can be
measured individually.

In an educational context, short messages (microblogging, or tweets) can be used
to express ideas, paraphrase or critique a concept, [18]. Short messages provide support
for the collaborative work of the students, as they facilitate posing questions, share ideas
and send answers. All this while practicing and learning by doing (active learning), that
is  in  this  case  reading  and  writing,  [19].  The  educational  activities  that  use  short
messages allow increased interactions, favor the discussion processes, and improve the
commitment in the learning process of students, whether they are working through
computer technologies in diﬀerent places, or face to face, [20–22].

One of the main contributions of software applications as a scaﬀolding for learning
activities is the real-time monitoring that the teacher can have on the level of progress
and achievement of his students, allowing her to act as a catalyst to produce changes in
the educational activity or in pedagogy [23]. For example, in [24] the teacher can review
student responses, achievement levels, etc., and select one for the purpose of initiating
a discussion involving the teacher and students. In this way, a computer application can
implement immediate feedback to the teacher and the students, with the consequent
contribution in the teaching-learning processes. Real-time monitoring is “the true heart
of learning that allows students to converse with others on the basis of the dissonance
revealed by the screens,” [25] which is a shared zone where divergences and reconcili‐
ations occur, necessary for the processes of reformulation of ideas, [26].

Nowadays, university leaders  are recognizing  the need for collaborative learning
inside of classroom, to bolster student success [27]. The goal of collaborative learning
technique is to support learning for a specific educational objective through a coordinated
and  shared  activity,  by  means  of  social  interactions  among  the  group  members  [28].
Research has shown that the proper design of collaborative learning tasks can improve
motivation levels, facilitate communication and social interaction [29], support coordina‐
tion and increase the level of students’ learning achievement [12, 19], and facilitate face-toface 
 work  supported  by  mobile  devices  [29–31].  Computational  technology  can  help
organize  the  information,  do  real-time  monitoring,  control  and  favor  divergence  and
convergence processes, and support the coordination and communication of members of
the collaborative work team [24, 28, 32]. On the other hand, peer instruction is an inter‐
active and collaborative teaching technique that promotes classroom interaction to engage
students and addresses difficult aspects of the material, [33, 34]. By providing opportuni‐
ties for students to discuss concepts in class, peer instruction allows them to learn collab‐
oratively from each other, [12]. It modifies the traditional lecture format to include ques‐
tions designed to engage students and uncover difficulties with the material.

Active learning is any learning method that gets students actively involved; collab‐
orative learning is one variety of active learning which structures students into groups
with deﬁned roles for  each student and a  task for the group  to  accomplish. Active
and/or collaborative learning techniques involve the students in the class and increase
retention of information following the class period. Individual active learning techniques
are easier to apply and take less class time, while collaborative learning techniques
require more advance planning and may take an entire class period, [35].

86

G. Zurita et al.

2.3 Choosing Members of Teamwork and Size of Team Works
According to [29, 36], technology can assist the conﬁguration of working teams in order
to  apply  various  criteria  with the  aim  of  gaining  more  eﬃciency  for  achieving the
proposed learning goals. In the literature we can ﬁnd few examples of this when this has
to be done by the teacher while the learning activity is taking place, and furthermore, it
considers performance results from previous stages. Most common criteria used for
forming work teams, in addition to random selection, are based on the selection of
students by academic achievement (resulting from the assessment of the level of learning
achieved for a speciﬁc educational objective) [37] and learning styles, [38]. Another
criteria are based on social characteristics of the members; or group goals and a theory
as an intelligent guidance that helps teachers to create theory-based CL scenarios, [39].
Conﬁguring team works according to the student’s performance is a well-known
collaborative learning best practice. A sample of representative research suggests that
task relevant, skill-homogeneous groups are good at narrowly deﬁned analytical tasks,
while  heterogeneous  groups  perform  better  in  extended  synthetic  tasks  requiring
learning, creativity and ideation, [32, 40]. According to [41], homogenous groups can
be more motivating for students while heterogeneous ones can oﬀer better learning
opportunities. Liu et al. [36], say that the heterogeneity tends to achieve better learning
levels in certain scenarios.

Learning styles are classiﬁcations of the diﬀerent ways of learning that are more
suitable  to  each  student,  whose  use  leads  to  an  improved  results.  Using  objects  or
learning elements that ﬁt best with students’ learning styles [42], Kolb developed a
questionnaire to identify them that later Honey and Mumford modiﬁed it to be used with
Spanish speaking students, [43]. Honey and Mumford classiﬁed learning styles in four
groups: active, reﬂective, theoretical, and pragmatic. Since the learning objects that will
be used in the reading comprehension activity will be the same, we consider that it will
be  more  useful  to  bring  together  students  who  have  heterogeneous  learning  styles.
Regarding the size of groups, in [44] 2 to 3 members are recommended, in order to raise
the levels of motivation among the members and avoid the formation of subgroups when
the number of members is greater. According to [45], in a team of four members there
will always be more simultaneous interaction than in a team of ﬁve or three. If the number
of components of a computer is odd (3 or 5), it is more likely that one member will not
interact with another at any point in time and will be out of activity.

2.4 Evaluation in Large Classrooms: Peer Evaluation
Another main problem with large classrooms, for both face-to-face and online scenarios
is giving timely and systematic feedback to students or evaluation of their performance,
because it takes a great amount of time and resources, [46]. One approach to solve the
problem mentioned above is involving students as peer evaluators of their classmates
in order to generate positive eﬀects in the educational process, not only because it may
help to overcome this problem by passing to the students most of the burden which
traditionally has been taken by the teaching staﬀ, but also because it has other positive
eﬀects  on  the  learning  process  such  as  engagement,  [47].  However, in  order  to  be

Practice of Skills for Reading Comprehension in Large Classrooms

87

eﬀective, peer evaluation should be positive correlated with that made by the teaching
staﬀ [48]. In other words, the peer student evaluation should be similar to those made
by the teaching staﬀ. For achieving this, we will introduce the previous calibration
method, which consists in students practice the application of an evaluation rubric on
sample examples before applying it to the work produced by their peers.

3 Design of the Reading Comprehension Activity: RedCoApp

This  section  describes  the  design  of  the  collaborative  activity  supported  by  the
RedCoApp  application,  which  can  be  used  under  two  roles:  teacher  (described  in
Sects. 3.1 to 3.3) and student (described in Sect. 3.4). The role of teacher allows access
to speciﬁc functionalities which display real-time information that reﬂects the state of
progress of the learning activity that students are performing at each stage (see Sect. 2,
real-time monitoring). The information presented to the teacher will be shown by easy
to understand graphic interfaces, such as comparative tables or matrices, bar charts, etc.
(See Figs. 2 and 3). The teacher role allows to manage the learning activity of reading
comprehension by activating in sequence each of the 6 stages that students must follow
(see Sect. 3.4). These are: (1) The creation of activities on reading comprehension, and
assigning them to students who will perform the tasks. (2) Real-time monitoring of the
task progress, which will allow the execution in sequence of each stage of the task as
they are completed; or identify at each stage the feedback that students need to receive
in order to advance at each stage and advance to the next. And (3) the assignment of the
student members that make up the work teams.

3.1 Reading Comprehension Task Creation – Teacher’s Role
This stage consists of the creation of the Reading comprehension activity where the
teacher performs following actions using the setup option (see Fig. 1): (a) inputs the
name of the activity and speciﬁes the detonating factor (DF) corresponding to the text
students have to produce individually based on the Reading task; (b) uploads the docu‐
ments students have to read; (c) identiﬁes the relevant key words (KW) and its alterna‐
tives associated to the speciﬁed detonating factor in order to compare them with the ones
identiﬁed by the students for measuring their achievement level; (d) assigns the students
that will participate in the task (using the “Users” labelled button in Fig. 1); (e) speciﬁes
the rubric associated to the detonating factor (using the “Rubric” labelled button in
Fig. 1) which students will use to evaluate the answers of their peers. The information
required for each student is their names and preferred learning style previously identiﬁed
based on the answers given to the questionnaire designed by Honey and Mumford [43],
see Sect. 2.3.

Each task may have 2 or 3 associated documents with a length of a half page which
are related according to the instructions given for the Reading task. The corresponding
detonating factor will require from each participating student to identify and mark three
keyword for each document ordered by relevance and write a small text justifying their
selection.

88

G. Zurita et al.

Fig. 1. View of the RedCoApp application’s interface for the teacher role to upload documents
to read (in the example, Shakespeare’s Monologue), specify the detonating factor (what are the
events  of  human  life  this  text  is  about?).  On  the  left  there  are  three  activities  of  reading
comprehension.

The KW speciﬁed by the teacher can then be compared with those produced by the
students thus generating relevant information about their performance. This information
is presented in a simple, clear visual way when the teacher presses the “Dashboard”
button in her application’s interface. (see Fig. 2). This information can be used by the
teacher in order to decide about: (a) going to the next stage; (b) provide feedback to the
students in order to better accomplish the task; (c) assign members to working groups
for the next working stages.

The evaluation rubric consists of 2 to 5 criteria for 4 levels of achievement, each of
them described in detail and speciﬁed by the teacher. In addition, the weighting of each
criterion should be speciﬁed and a ﬁnal comment will be made to the proposed rubric.
Before requesting the students to perform a peer evaluation of their responses, a cali‐
bration process will be performed for the rubric. For this, the teacher introduces three
possible answers, which will be used as examples. After completing the speciﬁcation
and determination of the data and instructions necessary for each task, the teacher can
start the learning activity (using the “Reading” button of Fig. 2) at the beginning of the
class, and to continue with the following stages.

3.2 Real Time Monitoring of the Task Development – Teacher’s Role
As already said, using the RedCoApp application the teacher has access to relevant
information during the learning activity in order to: (1) Identify the state of progress of

Practice of Skills for Reading Comprehension in Large Classrooms

89

Fig. 2. View of the teacher’s interface, showing a bar diagram with students’ performance, based
on comparing keywords chosen by the students and those proposed by the teacher.

the students in each of the stages of the learning activity. For example, the teacher can
know how many students have chosen the correct keywords (see the bar diagrams of
Fig. 2), or how many work teams have already completed the selection of the keywords
(using the “Dashboard” button during the “Team work” stage). Figure 1 shows all steps
in the upper part of the interface. This information will be used to decide whether to
move to the next stage or wait for a signiﬁcant number of students to complete the current
activity stage; (2) identify the level of achievement of students in each stage according
to keywords correctly chosen by the students. For example, if at the individual keyword
selection stage, there less than 1/3 of the students have successfully completed the task
the teacher may proceed to intervene the class, oﬀering feedback to explain the deto‐
nating factor, how to identify relevant keywords, explain the context of the texts, etc.

3.3 Conﬁguring Work Teams – Teacher’s Role
Using the application, the teacher determines the conﬁguration of the work teams, each
one composed of 2 to 4 students (see Sect. 2.3), or 3 in case the total number of students
is odd. Three criteria can be applied: (1) randomly; (2) based on performance (correct
selection of keywords during the “Individual” stage); and (3) based on the learning style
of each student. For the last two criteria, the teacher can also choose to group those
students who had similar or diﬀerent performance or learning styles (see Fig. 3).

90

G. Zurita et al.

Fig. 3.
Interfaces used by the teacher for the selection of the team members of a working group.
The top view generated a random proposal; The bottom one is generated based on performance,
with heterogeneous criterion: students with a good performance with others who did not perform
well.

3.4 Stages in the Learning Activity – Student’s Role
This section describes the 8 stages students should take with RedCoApp to accomplish
the reading comprehension learning activity. The 8 stages are performed in 2 regular
classes of 90 min (stages 1 to 5 in the ﬁrst class). RedCoApp was developed to be used
on iPads that will be provided to at least 60 students in a classroom. Stages 3 and 4
correspond to collaborative activities (see Sect. 2.2). Stages 2 to 7 correspond to active
learning activities (students are developing and applying reading comprehension strat‐
egies to develop this activity, see Sect. 2.2). Stage 4 corresponds to activities of the peer
instruction  type  (allows  students  to  learn  collaboratively  from  each  other,  see
Sect. 2.2).

Stage 1: Read instructions and texts (“Reading” stage of Fig. 1); time: 10 min.
And Stage 2: Start performing the task individually (“Individual” stage of Fig. 1);
time: 20 min. By entering the application and logging using a personal account, each
student receives the activities assigned by the teacher on their respective iPads. At this
stage, each student will read the instructions, the detonating factors, the documents, and
generate a keywords ranking individually. To choose a keyword, the student selects 1
to 3 words from the document, and write a short comment that justiﬁes this selection.
The student can at any time modify or eliminate an already speciﬁed keyword, as well
as the associated comment. During this stage, the student can change the order of the

Practice of Skills for Reading Comprehension in Large Classrooms

91

keywords ranking. At the end of this stage, each student must identify between 6 and 9
keywords (3 for each of the 2 or 3 documents) ranked by relevance, justiﬁed by short
messages.

Stage 3. Re-elaborate the task individually (“Review” stage of Fig. 1); time:
20  min.  Anonymously,  and  individually,  each  student  accesses  the  keywords  and
comments proposed by the other members of his team, with whom they will work in a
non-anonymous way in the next stage. On the basis of these keywords, the student reelaborates 
its initial keywords ranking proposal of ranking. Its original proposal remains
accessible. It is expected that the processing will generate between 6 and 9 new KW.
Stage 4. Re-elaborate the task collaboratively (“Team Work” stage of Fig. 1);
time: 25 min. The application shows each student the names of the members of his/her
work team. Each student can see the ranked list of keywords and their feedback of the
other members of their work team. Trough face-to-face interaction they must re-elabo‐
rate a proposal for a new keywords ranking, based on those developed in stages 1 and 2.
They can identify new keywords and their respective comments/justifications together,
which will be used in the next stage.

Stage 5. Answering to the detonating factor individually (“Individual Answer”
stage of Fig. 1); time: 15 min. Each student answers individually and in written form
to the detonating factor, based on the documents read, the ranking and comments/justi‐
ﬁcations of the keywords. The written document should refer to the keywords identiﬁed,
and their comments/justiﬁcations.

Stage 6. Rubric Calibration (“Rubric Calibration” state of Fig. 1); time: 40 min.
Around three texts are evaluated with a speciﬁc rubric, for which students must: (a) read
the text to be evaluated, and their detonating factor; (b) apply the rubric individually
(the text can be shown whenever the students want it), along with writing the general
comment; (c) analyze the results contrasting their own answers with the correct one
issued  by  the  teacher.  The  teacher  will  be  able  to  analyze  statistical  data  (mean,
frequency distribution, etc.) in order to be sure that students are correctly “calibrating”
their assessment skills, and can therefore activate the next stage. Calibration is a stage
that we foresee that needs special attention, because text examples for each learning task
depending on students’ prior achievements should be carefully chosen and commented
by the teacher.

Stage 7. Peer evaluation (“Peer evaluation” stage of Fig. 1); time: 30 min. At
this stage, students evaluate the responses of two other students anonymously and based
on the evaluation rubric proposed by the teacher. Each student receives 2 answers to
evaluate, which requires: (a) to read the text to be evaluated and its detonating factor;
(b) apply the evaluation rubric, together with the writing of a general commentary asso‐
ciated with its evaluation.

Stage 8. Analysis of the results and closure of the activity (“Finished” stage of
Fig. 1); time: approximately 20 min. In this stage the teacher analyses the students’
performance  in  front  of  the  students  presenting  some  data.  The  data  are:  general
performance comparing the answers of the students with the “correct” ones introduced
by the teacher, frequency distribution of the results associated with the detonating factor,
the best answers of the students, example of “interesting” answers, etc. It is expected

92

G. Zurita et al.

that at this stage the teacher will close the activity, provide feedback and assessment to
the students.

4 Conclusions and Next Steps

Following the Design-Based Research method, this section describes in general the
experiences that led to the design proposal explained in Sect. 3. The design was devel‐
oped during 4 months by a team of experts from diﬀerent areas, such as educators,
psychologists,  computer  scientists,  and  teachers.  Coordination  meetings  were  held
together for 4 h per week, along with at least 4 h on average of individual work that each
expert invested to explore, analyze and propose educational theories, methods and tech‐
niques, and their possible combinations to specify an educational activity. The decision
about which would be the most appropriate reading comprehension strategy to be used
in  large  classrooms  was  most  essential  outcome  to  design  a  collaborative  reading
comprehension activity and its RedCoApp support tool, which used several beneﬁts and
advantages that were identiﬁed in the literature on related applications.

From our experience and having reviewed the literature, we consider that the most
relevant contributions of the design of the presented activity to support reading compre‐
hension  and RedCoApp,  are  following  two aspects,  which  are  not  present  in  other
approaches: (1) the teacher can conﬁgure in groups in real time based on 3 criteria:
random, individual performance achieved by students during previous stages of the
activity, or the learning styles of each student (see Sect. 3.3); and (2) the prior calibration
of an evaluation rubric in order to ensure the quality of the peer evaluation application
to  individual  reading  comprehension  responses  that  are  asked  of  each  student  (see
description of stages 5 and 6 of the learning activity and Sect. 3.4).

It is also important to highlight other aspects of the design, which have been used in
other applications already but not in the context of reading comprehension: (1) Class‐
room Response System as a method for solving problems that arise in large classrooms;
(2)  monitoring  of  students’  performance  in  real  time;  and  (3)  active  collaborative
learning and peer evaluation.

The following steps of this research work envisage the implementation in large
classrooms  and  using it with real students,  in order to implement the experimental
process associated with the aforementioned design contributions. Results are expected
to feedback the design processes, and introduce improvements in learning activity and
the RedCoApp application.

Acknowledgements.  This paper was supported by Fondecyt Regular 1161200.

References

1. Duke, N.K., Pearson, P.D.: Eﬀective practices for developing reading comprehension. J. Educ.

189(1/2), 107–122 (2008)

2. Weber, C.L., Cavanaugh, T.W.: Promoting reading: using eBooks with gifted and advanced

readers. Gifted Child Today 29(4), 56–63 (2006)

Practice of Skills for Reading Comprehension in Large Classrooms

93

3. Hannaﬁn,  M.J.,  Land,  S.M.:  The  foundations  and  assumptions  of  technology-enhanced

student-centered learning environments. Instr. Sci. 25(3), 167–202 (1997)

4. Azzam, A.M.: Digital opportunity. Educ. Leadersh. 63(4), 89 (2005)
5. Cheung,  A.C.,  Slavin,  R.E.:  Eﬀects  of  educational  technology  applications  on  reading
outcomes for struggling readers: a best-evidence synthesis. Reading Res. Q. 48(3), 277–299
(2013)

6. McNamara,  D.S.:  Reading  Comprehension  Strategies:  Theories,  Interventions,  and

Technologies. Psychology Press, New York (2012)

7. Herreid, C.F.: “Clicker” cases: introducing case study teaching into large classrooms. J. Coll.

Sci. Teach. 36(2), 43 (2006)

8. Mazur, E.: Peer Instruction: A User’s Manual. Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River (1997)
9. Wang,  F.,  Hannaﬁn,  M.J.:  Design-based  research  and  technology-enhanced  learning

environments. Educ. Teach. Res. Dev. 53(4), 5–23 (2005)

10. Bannan-Ritland, B.: The role of design in research: the integrative learning design framework.

11. Caldwell, J.E.: Clickers in the large classroom: current research and best-practice tips. CBEEduc.
 Res. 32(1), 21–24 (2003)

Life Sci. Educ. 6(1), 9–20 (2007)

1–8 (2007)

12. Blasco-Arcas, L., et al.: Using clickers in class. The role of interactivity, active collaborative

learning and engagement in learning performance. Comput. Educ. 62, 102–110 (2013)

13. Katz, L., et al.: Considerations for using personal Wi-Fi enabled devices as “clickers” in a

large university class. Act. Learn. High. Educ. (2017). doi:10.1177/1469787417693495

14. Liu, C., et al.: The eﬀects of clickers with diﬀerent teaching strategies. J. Educ. Comput. Res.

(2016). doi:10.1177/0735633116674213

15. Barber, M., Njus, D.: Clicker evolution: seeking intelligent design. CBE-Life Sci. Educ. 6(1),

16. Deal, A.: Classroom response systems, a teaching with technology. White Paper, Oﬃce of

Technology for Education, Carnegie Mellon (2007)

17. Thiede, K.W., Anderson, M., Therriault, D.: Accuracy of metacognitive monitoring aﬀects

learning of texts. J. Educ. Psychol. 95(1), 66 (2003)

18. Prestridge, S.: A focus on students’ use of Twitter–their interactions with each other, content

and interface. Act. Learn. High Educ. 15(2), 101–115 (2014)

19. Carpenter, J.P.: Twitter’s capacity to support collaborative learning. Int. J. Soc. Media Interact.

Learn. Environ. 2(2), 103–118 (2014)

20. Tur, G., Marín, V.I.: Enhancing learning with the social media: student teachers’ perceptions

on Twitter in a debate activity. J. New Approaches Educ. Res. 4(1), 46 (2015)

21. Evans, C.: Twitter for teaching: can social media be used to enhance the process of learning?

Br. J. Educ. Technol. 45(5), 902–915 (2014)

22. Luo,  T.,  Gao,  F.:  Enhancing  classroom  learning  experience  by  providing  structures  to

microblogging-based activities. J. Inf. Technol. Educ. Innov. Pract. 11, 1 (2012)

23. Dufresne, R.J., et al.: Classtalk: a classroom communication system for active learning. J.

Comput. High. Educ. 7(2), 3–47 (1996)

24. Alvarez,  C.,  et  al.:  Collboard:  fostering  new  media  literacies  in  the  classroom  through
collaborative problem solving supported by digital pens and interactive whiteboards. Comput.
Educ. 63, 368–379 (2013)

25. Woodford,  K.,  Bancroft,  P.:  Using  multiple  choice  questions  eﬀectively  in  information

technology education. In: ASCILITE (2004)

26. Miao, Y., et al.: An activity-oriented approach to visually structured knowledge representation
for  problem-based  learning  in  virtual  learning  environments.  In:  Proceedings  of  Fourth
International Conference on the Design of Cooperative Systems (2000)

94

G. Zurita et al.

27. Adams  Becker,  S.,  Cummins,  M.,  Davis,  A.,  Freeman,  A.,  Hall  Giesinger,  C.,
Ananthanarayanan, V.: NMC Horizon Report: 2017. NMC Horizon Report, H.E. edn. The
New Media Consortium, Austin (2017)

28. Zurita,  G.,  Nussbaum,  M.:  Computer  supported  collaborative  learning  using  wirelessly

interconnected handheld computers. Comput. Educ. 42(3), 289–314 (2004)

29. Baloian, N., Zurita, G.: MC-supporter: ﬂexible mobile computing supporting learning though

social interactions. J. UCS 15(9), 1833–1851 (2009)

30. Zurita,  G.,  Baloian,  N.,  Baytelman,  F.:  A  face-to-face  system  for  supporting  mobile
collaborative design using sketches and pen-based gestures. In: 10th International Conference
on Computer Supported Cooperative Work in Design, CSCWD 2006. IEEE (2006)

31. Zurita,  G.,  Baloian,  N.:  Handheld-based  electronic  meeting  support.  In:  International

Conference on Collaboration and Technology. Springer (2005)

32. Zurita, G., Nussbaum, M., Salinas, R.: Dynamic grouping in collaborative learning supported

by wireless handhelds. Educ. Technol. Soc. 8(3), 149–161 (2005)

33. Crouch, C.H., Mazur, E.: Peer instruction: ten years of experience and results. Am. J. Phys.

69(9), 970–977 (2001)

34. Crouch, C.H., et al.: Peer instruction: engaging students one-on-one, all at once. In: ResearchBased 
Reform of University Physics, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 40–95 (2007)

35. Keyser, M.W.: Active learning and cooperative learning: understanding the diﬀerence and

using both styles eﬀectively. Res. Strateg. 17(1), 35–44 (2000)

36. Liu,  D.M.,  et  al.:  Smart  grouping  tool  portal  for  collaborative  learning.  In:  Frontiers  in

Education Conference (FIE), vol. 32614. IEEE (2015)

37. Amara, S., et al.: Using students’ learning style to create eﬀective learning groups in MCSCL
environments. In: 1st National Conference on Embedded and Distributed Systems, EDiS 2015
(2015)

38. Felder, R.M., Silverman, L.K.: Learning and teaching styles in engineering education. Eng.

Educ. 78(7), 674–681 (1988)

39. Isotani,  S.,  et  al.:  A  semantic  web-based  authoring  tool  to  facilitate  the  planning  of
collaborative learning scenarios compliant with learning theories. Comput. Educ. 63, 267–
284 (2013)

40. Paredes,  P.,  Ortigosa,  A.,  Rodriguez,  P.:  A  method  for  supporting  heterogeneous-group

formation through heuristics and visualization. J. UCS 16(19), 2882–2901 (2010)

41. Yacef,  K.,  McLaren,  B.M.:  Supporting  Learners’  Group  Formation  with  Reciprocal

Recommender Technology (2011)

42. Kolb, A.Y., Kolb, D.A.: Learning styles and learning spaces: enhancing experiential learning

in higher education. Acad. Manag. Learn. Educ. 4(2), 193–212 (2005)

43. Honey, P., Mumford, A.: The Learning Styles Helper’s Guide. Peter Honey Maidenhead,

(1989)

Berkshire (2000)

44. Sadeghi, H., Kardan, A.A.: A novel justice-based linear model for optimal learner group
formation in computer-supported collaborative learning environments. Comput. Hum. Behav.
48, 436–447 (2015)

45. Kagan, S.: The structural approach to cooperative learning. Educ. Leadersh. 47(4), 12–15

46. Saunders, F.C., Gale, A.W.: Digital or didactic: using learning technology to confront the

challenge of large cohort teaching. Br. J. Educ. Technol. 43(6), 847–858 (2012)

47. Oncu, S.: Online peer evaluation for assessing perceived academic engagement in higher

education. Eurasia J. Math. Sci. Technol. Educ. 11(3), 535–549 (2015)

48. Sahin, S.: An application of peer assessment in higher education. TOJET: Turk. Online J.

Educ. Technol. 7(2), 1–5 (2008)

