Promoting Active Learning in Large Classrooms:

Going Beyond the Clicker

Claudio Álvarez1, Nelson Baloian2(✉), Gustavo Zurita3, and Fabio Guarini1

1 Facultad de Ingeniería y Ciencias Aplicadas, Universidad de los Andes, Santiago, Chile

calvarez@uandes.cl, fguarini@miuandes.cl

2 Department of Computer Sciences, Universidad de Chile, Beaucheﬀ 851, Santiago, Chile

nbaloian@dcc.uchile.cl

3 Department of Information Systems and Management Control,

Faculty of Economics and Business, Universidad de Chile,

Diagonal Paraguay 257, Santiago, Chile

gzurita@fen.uchile.cl

Abstract.  Teaching  and  learning  in  most  current  university  lectures  has
remained unchanged for centuries and nowadays, large lecture classes are a fact
at universities. Technologies such as Classroom Response Systems have been
designed to ease the adoption of new pedagogical practice in these contexts;
however,  these  pose  technological,  economic  and  pedagogical  limitations  to
teachers, students and institutions. In this paper, we present a feasibility study of
a system that allows students to take snapshots of paper-based, handwritten solu‐
tions to a given task with their devices, and then converts this input to vector
graphics that are automatically hosted in a cloud-based storage service, such as
Google Drive. The teacher can then discuss students’ solutions and provide elab‐
orate formative feedback in class. We report on the ﬁndings of a feasibility study
with engineering students in Chile, which validate the practicality of the approach.
After this validation we plan to integrate optical character recognition capabilities
in the system, in order to support programming and physics education.
Keywords: BYOD · Classroom Response System (CRS) · Active learning

1

Introduction

The  educational  process  carried  out  in  brick  and  mortar  university  classrooms  has
remained almost static for the last couple of centuries [1]. This obliviously neglects a
wealth of research evidence indicating that not all students can learn eﬀectively through
the  same  learning  experiences  and  at  the  same  pace  [2].  In  addition,  ascertaining
students’  mastery  of  the  expected  learning  outcomes  requires  conducting  eﬀective
assessment [3]. With regard to assessment, high-stakes testing that is usually conducted
in Chilean university education poses two major problems:
1. The time span between successive assessments is too long (i.e., many weeks or
months), thus the teacher remains unaware of students’ learning performance for
most of the academic term.

© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
C. Gutwin et al. (Eds.): CRIWG 2017, LNCS 10391, pp. 95–103, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-63874-4_8

96

C. Álvarez et al.

2.

It is common that teachers themselves do not revise and grade students’ summative
tests due to the large amount of time this process requires. Instead, teaching assistants
usually conduct this work for them. As a result, teachers do not become aware of
students’ common misconceptions, errors and lack of learning, thus continue to
repeat ineﬀective teaching strategies term after term.
Both problems mentioned above, together with the assumption that all students do
not learn at the same pace, calls for solutions that can provide the university teacher
continuous awareness on students’ learning progress, and the possibility for him/her to
provide the students timely feedback that can eﬀectively address learning issues. One
way in which such solutions can be implemented is through embracing Active Learning
(AL) in the classroom [2]. With AL the teacher conducts hands-on activities with the
students,  improving  their  motivation  and  understanding  compared  to  traditional
lecturing [4]. Moreover, through observation of students’ results in the classroom, the
teacher is able to discern the extent to which students have mastered expected learning
outcomes. It is therefore a common practice to conduct formative assessment activities
in AL contexts, enabling the teacher to become aware of students’ common miscon‐
ceptions, errors and lack of learning, and take prompt remedial action. According to the
literature [1, 3], formative assessment activities in university classrooms consist of lowstakes 
tests conducted with following procedure: (1) The teacher presents the problem
statement to the students. (2) The students try to solve the problem either mentally if the
problem’s cognitive requirements are low, or by sketching the solution on paper and
pencil if more complex knowledge representations are needed to solve it. (3) The teacher
will have a quick look at students’ responses and spot any common misconceptions or
errors. (4) The teacher provides feedback addressing learning shortcomings through
further explanation and examples.

Analyzing this procedure, we can see the limitations that arise when embracing active
learning and conducting formative assessment activities with large cohorts and no tech‐
nological support. Firstly, management issues arise, as the teacher requires quick collec‐
tion of students’ responses and selecting those that can provide evidence for learning
misconceptions and shortcomings. Secondly, the teacher needs to draw on students’
responses to show and comment on students’ own mistakes or achievements, and s/he
has no convenient way to display (project) students’ solutions at a large size in the
classroom, and to edit and combine students’ responses.

In the past, various systems have been developed allowing students to work on
computer-based “documents” or “electronic worksheets”. These technologies enable the
teacher to monitor students’ in-class work [5–7]. However, most of these systems have
been used with small cohorts, as the activities require 1:1 computer-student settings
which are diﬃcult to scale to large classrooms [6]. Classroom Response Systems (CRS)
[8, 9] have been used for fostering students’ participation in class, by introducing some
kind of technological device for the student to deliver an answer to a question or problem
posed by the teacher. Commonly, closed-ended or multiple-choice questions are posed
to the students, rather than open-ended questions and tasks that prompt for more elab‐
orate responses requiring more sophisticated knowledge representations [10].

In this work, we present a feasibility study of a CRS system that allows students to
submit pictures of their work to the teacher by using the camera on their mobile phone.

Promoting Active Learning in Large Classrooms

97

The system transforms the handwriting and sketches contained in the pictures to Scalable
Vector Graphics (SVG), which the teacher can further edit and combine with a tablet
device or an interactive whiteboard, to provide feedback to the students in formative
assessment  activities.  Furthermore,  SVG  facilitates  enabling  automatic  handwriting
recognition, which could be used to input students’ responses to third-party applications,
such as simulation software, or a programming language. The abovementioned process
can  be  implemented  in  a  technology-enhanced  manner  as  follows:  (1)  The  teacher
presents the problem statement to the students. (2) The students try to solve it using
pencil and paper. (3) Upon completion of the exercise or the time set for the exercise,
students capture an image of the response with their smart phones and send it to the
system for processing. (4) Once the images have been processed, the teacher reviews
the answers on his tablet, selecting a set of them that can serve as a basis for carrying
out the next step. (5) The teacher proceeds to the discussion, feedback, evaluation, anal‐
ysis and storage of students’ responses and elaborates feedback for the students.

The following sections present a review of related literature, an account of our feasi‐
bility study that includes a description of the system, the results of the study and pros‐
pects for future work.

2 Related Work: Active Learning in Large Classrooms

Although  large  classrooms  are  cost  effective,  they  have  many  disadvantages  for
learning [8]. Attempts to offset these problems include implementing participative
learning methods, such as in-class problem solving, case studies, and peer discus‐
sion.  Technology  has  been  used  to  support  these  efforts.  In  particular,  the  term
Classroom Response Systems (CRS) [9] refers to technology which allows a teacher
to present a question or problem to the class, students to enter their answers using
some  kind  of  device,  and  then  aggregates  and  summarizes  students’  answers
instantly. An interesting example is Eric Mazur’s experience with Peer Instruction
in  physics  education  at  Harvard  [11,  12]. Regarding  CRS,  studies  have  reported
greater levels of student motivation [13], better student understanding [13], increased
classroom attendance, higher student performance, improved student participation
in  class  [4,  12],  support  for  collaborative  learning  activities  [12],  and  enhanced
learning in the classroom [10, 15]. The main goal of a CRS has been to increase
student  engagement,  especially  in  large  classes  where  students  may  feel  discon‐
nected and anonymous [8, 16].

According to [14], four diﬀerent CRS-type technologies have been applied in large
classrooms to collect students’ instant responses: (1) low-cost, low-technology tools
such as hands, ﬂashcards, color cards, or whiteboards (2) instant response systems: such
as  numeric  keypads,  interconnected  by  hard-wired  equipment.  (3)  wireless  radio
frequency  or  infrared  devices,  which  resemble  a  TV  remote  control.  (4)  wireless
network-based systems and so-called Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) settings [17],
i.e., smartphones can be used as answer devices, and an application can quickly scan
and collect students’ answers. Positive eﬀects of CRS on student’s cognitive abilities
like critical thinking, problem solving and metacognition have been reported in [14].

98

C. Álvarez et al.

Despite the signiﬁcant beneﬁts reported, CRS have some disadvantages too. Despite
the ease of use of the technology and the beneﬁts that they provide, faculty members
may be reluctant to introduce new technologies in class and may perceive high costs in
terms of time and eﬀort investments. In addition, similar to other advanced technologies,
CRS can generate frustration and unsatisfactory situations due to technical issues like
failures or bugs [10].

Nowadays, the need for collaborative learning inside of classroom, around datasharing,
  is  understood  as  a  fundamental  basis  to  incorporate  suitable  collaborative
learning  activities,  to  bolster  student  success  [17].  The  BYOD  movement  calls  for
enabling students to perform learning activities by using the technology with which they
are  already  familiar.  This  permits  students  a  greater  sense  of  ownership  over  their
learning, brings productivity gains and fosters ubiquitous learning.

3 Feasibility Study

The system here proposed is illustrated in Fig. 1, and it works as follows: The teacher poses
a task for the students to work on in class (step 1), then the students write down their
solutions to the task on paper and take a picture of it with their mobile phones (step 2).
Thereafter the students submit the solution to a web application (step 3). The web applica‐
tion issues an asynchronous processing job to an image processing RESTful service that
corrects (i.e. crops, rotates, and adjust image levels) and converts (i.e. binarizes and vector‐
izes) the original bitmap image. When the resulting vector image is ready, the web appli‐
cation is notified by the service and then the vector image is uploaded by the web applica‐
tion to a cloud-based storage service, such as Google Drive or Dropbox. In step 4, the
teacher can review the solutions submitted by the students, and then conduct a discussion
viewing, editing, combining different solutions using any vector illustration application
available in his/her mobile device (step 5).

Fig. 1. The system is composed of a web application that hosts the user frontend, and an image
processing service that corrects and enhances the source image, and cloud-based storage.

Promoting Active Learning in Large Classrooms

99

We conducted an initial trial of the system involving a cohort engineering students
at Universidad de los Andes, Santiago, Chile. The trial comprised two activities based
on logic problems, which were conducted with the intent to evaluate technological
features and pedagogical usability of the tool; namely, we sought to assess the quality
of the SVG digital sketches produced by the image processing algorithm embedded in
the system, the practicality of the tool in the classroom from the students’ standpoint,
and validating the digital aﬀordances oﬀered by the tool to the teacher, to conduct
discussions examining students’ sketches on a tablet device.

The trial was conducted in a classroom equipped with a full HD projector, a WiFi

access point, an AppleTV device and mobile chairs with swivel tablet arm.

3.1 Sample Description
Seven engineering students attended the trial activity. Six of them majored in computer
science, and one in electrical engineering. All the students were male with ages between
22 and 25 years. The mean age of the group was 23.9 years. Every student in the sample
owned an iOS or Android smartphone with photo camera.

An engineering thesis student took the teacher role in the activity. He used a 12-inch
iPad Pro device to monitor students’ activity and discuss their solutions to the tasks
comprised in the trial. The AppleTV device in the classroom was used to stream the
iPad’s screen contents to the projector in the classroom.

3.2 Procedure
Firstly, a short brieﬁng was delivered by the teacher to the students, which included an
overview of the system and an explanation about the learning ﬂow of the activity. The
students were also given some hints on how to take appropriate pictures of their hand‐
writing on paper, with suitable lighting and framing. Then they were instructed to open
the solution submission site in the web browser in their smartphones.

After the brieﬁng, the teacher presented the ﬁrst task to the students on paper. The
task was based on a puzzle problem based on the popular game Strimko. The students
had to solve the puzzle with paper and pen, which involved drawing a graph with several
numbered nodes and edges. When a student ﬁnished writing his solution, he was required
to take a picture with his smartphone and submit it through the online submission form.
In the meantime, the teacher automatically received the students’ solutions as SVG
illustrations in a Google Drive folder (see the conversion process in Fig. 2), which he
could check on his iPad device with a vector illustration application. Once all the students
submitted their solutions, the teacher continued to present and discuss the students’
diﬀerent approaches to solve the problem. He managed to edit students’ solutions in the
application, with digital handwriting on the iPad device.

100

C. Álvarez et al.

Fig. 2. Steps to students’ automatic response digitalization and conversion to vector graphics.

The  second  task  of  the  trial  was  about  solving  a  logic  puzzle.  The  puzzle  was
presented to the students in narrative form, which included a partial solution. It was the
students’ job to ﬁnd an explanation for such solution, and state the explanation in either
verbal language, formal logic or both. The same learning ﬂow described above was
conducted, with the activity ending with a discussion mediated by the teacher.

At the end of the activity a survey was administered, with the aim to collect students’
appraisal and impressions about the trial and practicality of the tool in the classroom.

3.3 Results
The items and results of the survey conducted at the end of the trial are shown in Table 1.
The responses to the first two questions were unanimously affirmative and ascertain that the
initial instructions in the briefing were clear to all the students. The responses to questions
3 and 4 show that some students had difficulty taking a good picture with the smartphone,
however, uploading the picture to the system once taken was easy. The quality of the
processed images displayed on the projector screen was very good (question 5), and the
students liked the methodology and considered its implementation in engineering lectures
feasible and desirable (questions 6–8, and 10–12). However, only 5 of 7 students had their
solutions  selected  for  at  least  one  of  the  discussions  and  therefore  displayed  on  the
projector screen (question 9). The students consider that the system could be useful for
both regular lectures and recitations (question 13), and that keeping the original solution
submitted by the student and the solution modified by the teacher would be beneficial for
learning (question 14).

Promoting Active Learning in Large Classrooms

101

Table 1. Results of students’ survey.

Question

#
1 Were you able to understand the instructions given
at the beginning of the trial for taking pictures with
your smartphone?

2 Were you able to understand the instructions given

at the beginning of the trial for submitting your
responses to the teacher

3 What is the diﬃculty level of taking a picture of a

handwritten solution on paper with your
smartphone?

4 What is the diﬃculty level of submitting pictures

taken with your smartphone to the teacher?

5

6
7

How does the digital version of your response
presented by the teacher in the discussion resemble
the original response you wrote on paper?
Did you like the activity?
Do you think the methodology used in the activity
could be implemented in engineering classrooms?

8 Would you like to participate in regular classes

with this methodology?

9 Was any of your responses selected in the

discussions conducted in the activity?

10 Do you think this methodology could facilitate

teacher-student communication in the classroom?

11 Do you think this methodology could facilitate

student-student communication in the classroom?

13

12 Do you think this methodology can improve

learning of certain contents?
In which of the following contexts do you think this
methodology could be beneﬁcial? (1) Problems in
class about new contents, (2) Problems in class
about previous contents, (3) Recitation problems
14 Which of the following solutions can be useful for

students’ further analysis and study after
discussion? (1) Only the original version,
(2) Only the modiﬁed version, (3) Both versions

Answers
No (0), Yes (1)

M (SD)
1.0

No (0), Yes (1)

1.0

Five-point Likert
Scale (LS)
0: Very diﬃcult
5: Very easy
Five-point LS
0: Very diﬃcult
5: Very easy
Four-point LS
0: Very poorly
4: Very well
No (0), Yes (1)
No (0), Yes (1)

No (0), Yes (1)

No (0), Yes (1)

No (0), Yes (1)

No (0), Yes (1)

No (0), Yes (1)

Multiple-choice

Multiple-choice

3.86/5.00 (0.49)

4.29/5.00 (0.76)

3.71/4.00 (0.49)

1.0
1.0

1.0

0.71

1.0

1.0

1.0

Choice frequency:
1:3
2:5
3:5
Choice frequency:
1:0
2:2
3:5

The teacher was able to conduct the activity with no technical issues or errors. He
could access the students’ solutions automatically copied by the system to his personal
Google Drive folder and display them in the illustration application on the iPad Pro
device with ease. The students’ solutions were highly legible.

102

C. Álvarez et al.

4 Conclusions and Future Work

The CRS  system presented here allows  students  to  submit  solutions  to  open-ended
problems proposed by the teacher using their own smartphones, and in a very simple
fashion. The teacher has the possibility to review (at least a sample of) students’ solutions
and provide elaborate feedback in the classroom to address students’ common miscon‐
ceptions, errors, and analyze diﬀerent ways to solve a given problem. This procedure is
easily scalable to large classrooms, allowing students to actively participate in lectures.
At this stage of our work we successfully tested the system with a small cohort of engi‐
neering students, evincing that the technology can support active learning activities with
formative feedback with use of student-owned smartphones. In addition, the technology
supports the teacher in elaborating feedback based on students’ handwritten responses.
After completing our ﬁrst proof of concept, through which we have managed to
digitize  students’  handwritten  responses,  obtain  clearly  legible  and  editable  vector
graphics, and have the solutions automatically stored in a cloud-based storage service,
our future eﬀorts will aim at applying optical character recognition to students’ hand‐
writing, in order to use students’ handwritten text and sketches as input for a program‐
ming language interpreter, such as Python, or a physics simulation software. In the case
of programming education, the system opens the possibility to lively test students’ orig‐
inal handwritten code on paper, modify the code (e.g. merge code from diﬀerent solu‐
tions, or debug the code), and distribute the code back to the students. On the other hand,
mechanics simulation could be possible by means of stating movement equations and
sketching the bodies in motion on paper. From a more general point of view, we envision
that our system will evolve towards becoming a general means for seamlessly converting
students’ and teachers’ contents generated with paper and pen to digital learning objects,
and in this way augment teacher’s possibilities  to elaborate formative feedback for
students in lectures, beyond what is possible with the conventional clicker-based CRS.

Acknowledgements.  This  research  has  been  partially  funded  by  the  Chilean  Science  and
Technology Commission (CONICYT) through grant FI-11160211.

References

1. Biggs, J.B.: Teaching for Quality Learning at University: What the Student Does. McGrawHill 
Education, Maidenhead (2011)

2. Freeman, S., et al.: Active learning increases student performance in science, engineering,

and mathematics. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 111(23), 8410–8415 (2014)

3. Black, P., Wiliam, D.: Developing the theory of formative assessment. Educ. Assess. Eval.

Account. 21(1), 5 (2009)

4. Deslauriers, L., Schelew, E., Wieman, C.: Improved learning in a large-enrollment physics

class. Science 332(6031), 862–864 (2011)

5. Baloian, N., Pino, J.A., Hoppe, H.U.: Dealing with the students’ attention problem in computer

supported face-to-face lecturing. Educ. Technol. Soc. 11(2), 192–205 (2008)

Promoting Active Learning in Large Classrooms

103

6. Baloian,  N.,  Pino,  J.A.,  Hardings,  J.,  Hoppe,  H.U.:  Monitoring  student  activities  with  a
querying system over electronic worksheets. In: Baloian, N., Burstein, F., Ogata, H., Santoro,
F., Zurita, G. (eds.) CRIWG 2014. LNCS, vol. 8658, pp. 38–52. Springer, Cham (2014). doi:
10.1007/978-3-319-10166-8_4

7. Yoon, S.A., Koehler-Yom, J., Anderson, E., Lin, J., Klopfer, E.: Using an adaptive expertise
lens to understand the quality of teachers’ classroom implementation of computer-supported
complex systems curricula in high school science. Res. Sci. Technol. Educ. 33(2), 237–251
(2015)

8. Herreid, C.F.: “Clicker” cases: introducing case study teaching into large classrooms. J. Coll.

Sci. Teach. 36(2), 43 (2006)

9. Chien, Y.T., Chang, Y.H., Chang, C.Y.: Do we click in the right way? A meta-analytic review
of clicker-integrated instruction. Educ. Res. Rev. 17, 1–18 (2016). http://doi.org/10.1016/
j.edurev.2015.10.003

10. Blasco-Arcas, L., et al.: Using clickers in class. The role of interactivity, active collaborative

learning and engagement in learning performance. Comput. Educ. 62, 102–110 (2013)

11. Mazur, E.: Peer Instruction: A User’s Manual. Prentice-Hall, Prentice-Hall (1997)
12. Crouch, C.H., Mazur, E.: Peer instruction: ten years of experience and results. Am. J. Phys.

69(9), 970–977 (2001)

13. Camacho-Miñano, M.-D.-M., del Campo, C.: Useful interactive teaching tool for learning:

clickers in higher education. Interact. Learn. Environ. 24(4), 706–723 (2016)

14. Liu, C., et al.: The eﬀects of clickers with diﬀerent teaching strategies. J. Educ. Comput. Res.

(2016). doi:10.1177/0735633116674213

15. Deal, A.: Classroom response systems, a teaching with technology. White Paper, Oﬃce of

Technology for Education, Carnegie Mellon University (2007)

16. Trees,  A.R.,  Jackson,  M.H.:  The  learning  environment  in  clicker  classrooms:  student
processes of learning and involvement in large university-level courses using student response
systems. Learn. Media Technol. 32(1), 21–40 (2007)

17. Adams Becker, S., et al.: NMC/CoSN Horizon Report: 2016K (2016)

