A Blended Learning Environment for enhancing 
Meaningful Learning using 21st Century Skills 

Gustavo Zurita1, Beatriz Hasbun3, Nelson Baloian2, Oscar Jerez3 

1 Management Control and Information Systems Department, Business and Economics Faculty, 

Universidad de Chile, gzurita@fen.uchile.cl 

2Department of Computer Science, Universidad de Chile, nbaloian@dcc.uchile.cl 
3 CEA – Teaching and Learning Center, Business and Economics Faculty,   

Universidad de Chile, {bhasbun,ojerez}@fen.uchile.cl 

Abstract. In this work we present a study that documents how a blended learning 
environment  could  enhance  students’  meaningful  learning  practicing  21st  Century 
Skills. This study examines the outcomes of an experience done with 119 students of 
an undergraduate course on “Information Technology” for Business at a University 
regarding 
level  education.  Students  had 
communication,  information  literacy  and  ICT  literacy  supported  by  a  blendedlearning 
environment. Results show a significant increase in meaningful learning by 
the  end  of  the  course.  This  study  illustrates  the  potential  that  blended  learning 
environments offer for higher education.   
Keywords: Blended-learning, 21st Century Skills, meaningful learning. 

to  practice  21st  Century  Skills 

1      Introduction 

 
Higher  education  in  developing  countries  is  moving  from  a  content-based  curriculum  to  a 
competence-based one. There is a consensus that along with acquiring the traditional knowledge, 
acquiring  skills  like  communication,  information  literacy  and  ICT  literacy  to  perform  any 
professional activity in an increasing complex and demanding world is also very relevant [2]. In 
our contemporary society, business people are constantly supported by ICT to search information, 
work in teams, create new ideas, products, and services and share these with their colleagues. In 
this  context,  it  is  crucial  to  flexibly  respond  to  complex  problems,  communicate  effectively, 
manage information dynamically, work and create solutions in teams, use technology effectively, 
and produce  new  knowledge  continuously.  According to  many  authors,  all of  these  skills are 
needed by the individual of the 21st century in order to perform properly at work [2, 7]. Moreover, 
the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business (AACSB), a renowned organization 
for accreditation of business school established that school program learning goals should include 
those  that  address  the  acquisition  of  communication  skills,  problem-solving  abilities,  ethical 
reasoning skills, language skills, technology skills, as well as management-specific knowledge 
[8]. 

To embrace these new challenges, Universities have developed different approaches; however, 
those  on  the  so-called  meaningful  learning  approach  [3],  and  making  extensive  use  of 
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) in blended-learning (b-learning) scenarios, 
have been some of the most attractive and most used alternatives [2 - 6]. But how it is possible to 
train the 21st century skills in a b-learning course in order to achieve meaningful learning? 

Ó Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015
G. Chen et al. (eds.), Emerging Issues in Smart Learning,
Lecture Notes in Educational Technology, DOI 10.1007/978-3-662-44188-6_1

1

Meaningful  learning  occurs  when  the  learner  is  able  to  relate  new  information  to  already 
known ideas and knowledge [3, 6]. Its quality also depends on the conceptual richness of the new 
material being learned, and the quantity and organization quality of the relevant knowledge the 
learner  has  already  acquired.  Meaningful  learning  has  three  requirements:  a)  relevant  prior 
knowledge; b) meaningful material; and c) a learner must choose to learn meaningfully which 
means  that  the  learner  must  consciously  and  deliberately  choose  to  relate  new  knowledge  to 
relevant knowledge the learner already knows [6].   

At a primary stage educational technologies were often only used to generate efficiencies in 
content  delivery  and  testing,  although  nowadays  many  educational  technologies  focus  on 
developing  thinking  skills  and  allowing  students  to  rehearse  for  future  performances  in  a 
technology-rich  workforce.  We  can  find  various  examples  of  frameworks  proposed  for 
describing  and  characterizing  the  21st  century  skills  in  the  literature  [2,  7,  9];  particularly  the 
KSAVE  model  seems  to  present  characteristics,  which  are  also  present  in  most  of  the  other 
models  [2].  KSAVE  considers  ten  skills  grouped  into  four  categories:  a)  ways  of  thinking  - 
creativity and innovation, critical thinking, problem solving, decision making, learning to learn, 
metacognition;  b)  ways  of  working  -  communication,  collaboration;  c)  tools  for  working  - 
information literacy, ICT literacy; and d) living in the world – local and global citizenship, life 
and career, personal and social responsibility. 
B-learning is becoming increasingly popular among the e-learning modalities, which 
 
combines 
technology-mediated  distance 
teaching/learning [5, 10]. It is considered a learning modality, which favors meaningful learning 
because it supports its processes in various dimensions and with various resources [4, 5], since it 
allows for the active integration and of the student and combines different learning modes. It is 
necessary  to  design  the  learning  process  as  a  single  multidimensional  formative  experience, 
which considers the following aspects: the learner, the teacher, the curriculum and assessment, 
the structure of schooling, the essential conditions for ICT integration and the research on the role 
of IT in education [11]. This contrasts with the traditional teaching style that includes just lectures, 
paper readings, the out-of-context use of ICT, and content evaluation [3, 12]. According to our 
experience, b-learning environments are able to foster the process of linking previous knowledge 
with new information in relevant and motivating contexts [3], using diverse multimedia resources 
causing real impacts on learning and practicing communication, information literacy, and ICT 
literacy skills (see section 3.2, last paragraph).. 

(f2f)  presence 

face-to-face 

learning  with 

Taking the above arguments into consideration, we propose to carry on an experience in order 
to  research  the  role  of  using  b-learning  to  support  the  learning  of  certain  contents  and  their 
practice  in  an  undergraduate  course  on  “Information  Technology  for  Business”,  in  the  8th 
semester  of  the  Information  and  Management  Control  Engineering  degree  program  of 
Economics and Business at the University of Chile. The hypothesis of this work is that b-learning 
enhances meaningful learning, through the practice of communication, information literacy, and 
ICT  literacy  skills,  relating  concepts  learned  in  the  classroom  with  current  news  containing 
examples of using Information Technologies to support Business. 

2      Related work 

According to [5, 10], b-learning is an efficient teaching model because it combines selfpaced 
learning, (students learning anytime, anywhere, by executing the e-learning activities), 
live e-learning (takes place in a virtual environment where students communicate among one 

2G. Zurita et al.another, share information, etc.), and face-to-face (f2f) classroom learning (social interaction 
with both the teacher and other students in a room). 

Various positive and successful experiences of b-learning are reported in the literature. 
It has been said that it reduces the time needed for preparing the exam, ensures deep-level 
learning, enhances student retention of the course, etc. [13]. However, there is still little 
research exploring the relationships between b-learning and meaningful learning.     

Therefore, in our understanding, a successful b-learning environment must be carefully 
designed  to  provide  the  development  of  meaningful  learning  and  certain  skills  in  the 
students, by achieving specific learning objectives involving teacher and students in face-
to-face and online activities [14]. 

B-learning  environments  have  been  applied  to  support  learning  of  different  areas  of 
knowledge: information science, engineering, nursing, and business [5], among others. It 
has  taken  on  increasing  importance  and  research  attention  for  business  education 
(Information  System,  Management,  Marketing,  Accounting,  Economics,  and  Finance) 
during the first decade of the 21st century [15]. Regarding b-learning environments in the 
area  of  Information  Systems,  many  conceptual  frameworks  have  provided  alternative 
perspectives, which have promoted the development of applications for specific contexts 
[16]  proposing  a  conceptual  framework  by  focusing  on  system  design  and  elements  of 
quality,  system  delivery,  and  system  outcomes  [17].  They  propose  a  context-specific 
conceptual  framework  that  includes  objectivist  and  constructivist  approaches  to 
synchronous and asynchronous delivery of learning  material [18], arguing that effective 
technology-mediated  learning  depends  on  participants’  interaction,  technology,  and 
instructional  design.  Unfortunately,  though  IS  scholars  have  been  actively  involved  in 
developing  conceptual  frameworks;  they  have  not  been  as  active  in  testing  them  [5], 
which is exactly the aim of this work. Nevertheless, there are studies showing empirical 
evidence:  a)  In  [19]  authors  examined  the  impact  of  “virtual  interaction”  using  five 
different treatment groups with varying levels of learner control of the virtual instructor, 
concluding  that  b-learning  might  lead  to  more  effective  learning;  b)  In  [20],  authors 
examined the extent to which a learning platform could help undergraduates in ICT skills 
development. 

3      Design of a b-learning environment 

This section describes the f2f and e-learning facets of a b-learning environment, based 
on the constructivist approach, which is the most widely used. By using this environment 
students are helped while constructing their own meaning of knowledge, enabling them to 
communicate and exchange their ideas by using their ICT literacy skills [21].   

3.1  Design of the f2f environment 

The course “Information Technology for Business” aims at developing student skills that will 
allow  them  to  create  technological  solutions  to  solve  problems  or  take  advantage  of 
opportunities  within  an  organization.  The  course  has  10  credits,  and  is  compulsory  in  the 
fourth year of the Information and Management Engineering degree at the University of Chile.   
As part of their mandatory assignments for completing the course, students have to perform 
three short projects, pass three exams and regularly contribute in an on-line discussion board 

A Blended Learning Environment for Enhancing Meaningful …3by including recent news found in diverse media related to the different topics covered in the 
lecture sessions. The lecture sessions are complemented with the discussions on the board. The 
integration  of  both  elements  is  performed  by  collecting  news  from  the  discussion  board  to 
initiate discussion within the classroom. In this way, students are motivated to deliver better 
news and the task acquires a sense.   

Likewise,  the  teacher  promotes  students  participation  with  questions,  allowing  them  to 
exercise the use of technical concepts to give an oral opinion. The same task has to be carried 
out  in  written  form,  considering  the  contents  of  the  course  and  possible  applications  of 
technological developments at companies. 

3.2  Design of the e-learning environment 

The on-line learning platform that students regularly use to support their activities during the 
semester  offers  a  discussion  board  with  the  following  services:  publication  of  new  topics, 
possibility of replying to others’ contributions, notifications concerning user availability and 
recent activity, metric of participation level (high, medium, low), a tag cloud, and a search bar. 
In order to make a contribution, students have to select news, cite their respective sources 
(e.g. a link to the original Web article), and write a short personal opinion on it. Once this 
contribution  is  made  publicly  available  in  the  software  platform,  other  students  have  the 
chance to rate the article (according to their own perception on quality and pertinence) and 
comment on the contribution. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Fig. 1. General user interface of the online discussion board 

 

4G. Zurita et al.The user interface is divided into two modules: 1) a main page where users can read the 
different  contributions  published  in  the  site,  and  2)  a  detailed  view  of  one  of  these 
contributions. The first module displays a list of the 10 most recent contributions, a tag cloud 
and a panel of links pointing to other articles classified by categories and relevant tags (see Fig. 
1).  This  element,  alongside  with  the  search  bar,  helps  users  identify  and  find  relevant 
documents, facilitating thus the interaction between the author and the reader. Users can access 
the detailed view of any contribution by either clicking on its title, content, or dedicated icon at 
the bottom of the box. Other articles can be found by navigating through different pages at the 
bottom of the site.   

The second module, displays the complete text (citing the source from where it was taken), 
the personal opinion of the author regarding the content of the article, and a list of reactions 
other  students  posted.  In  both  modules,  students  can  practice  communication  skills  while 
writing, presenting their ides as well as understanding other students’ messages in a variety of 
situations and for different purposes, or formulating their arguments in a convincing way [2]. 
At  the  same  time,  students  practice  their  information  literacy  abilities  when  searching, 
collecting, organizing and distinguishing relevant electronic data and information, as well as 
when accessing and searching for information media [2].   

4    Research design 

For this study, we worked with three groups of students enrolled in the course Information 
Technology  from  the  Business  School  at  the  University  of  Chile.  The  first  group  was 
composed of 46 students (17 men and 29 women), and they participated in this study between 
August and November 2012. The second group involved 34 students (19 men and 15 women) 
that participated between March and June 2013. And the third group involved 39 students (18 
men  and  21  women)  that  participated  between  August  and  November  2013.  None  of  the 
students were in both groups simultaneously. 

The platform was in service for all groups over 15 weeks. We established three milestones 
where we gathered information about the data traffic on the site, and afterwards reinitialized 
the counters. These milestones were roughly placed every five weeks in order to make results 
comparable between groups.   

The instruction for students was to search for news, articles and/or interesting cases from 
different  sources  like  Newspapers,  Internet  or  videos,  which  were  linked  to  the  use  of 
information  technologies,  and  attach  it  to  the  site.  They  also  had  to  write  a  “Personal 
Comment" of at least 300 words length aimed at a college audience, meeting the following 
requirements: 

 
1. 

2. 

3. 

Justify the value of the technological contribution of the news, explaining its use or 
application  on  a  specific  subject  and  indicating  what  is  better  now  with  this 
technology;   
Identify  and  explain  how  it  can  be  transferred  to  other  areas,  highlighting  some 
contribution to any component of the value chain of an organization; 
Relate the news content seen in classes or in previous courses. 
 

The last requirement is crucial to the b-learning environment, in terms of integrating the 
discussion  board  to  the  classroom.  The  instructions  were  designed  considering  3  of  the  10 
skills included in the KSAVE model: communication, information literacy and ICT literacy. 

A Blended Learning Environment for Enhancing Meaningful …5The students practice their ICT literacy abilities while using e-learning technology as a tool to 
research, organize, evaluate and communicate information; access ICT efficiently (time) and 
effectively (sources); employ knowledge in the application of ICT and media to communicate 
and present ideas [2]. 

From the perspective of a quantitative educational research methodology, we chose a quasiexperimental 
design with measures before and after the intervention. In the context of Higher 
Education, where students are already grouped according to degrees, the level of control over 
the formation of the group for performing experimental assignment is usually low. This type of 
research in natural contexts aims to maintain the internal validity of the study by  means of 
different  strategies  (control  of  extraneous  variables,  pre/post-test  measures,  etc.).  We 
subsequently introduce a research instance under these methodological assumptions.   

The data used corresponds to student participation in the online forum of the course in 
terms of own news publication. This news were evaluated using a rubric that included six 
dimensions, 3 associated with formal aspects of writing called "own voice" (spelling and 
writing,  internal  consistency,  and  personal  perspective)  and  3  associated  with  the 
application  and  interpretation  of  the  contents  of  the  course  named  "Argument" 
(meaningful  learning,  justification,  and  argumentation).  Each  dimension  has  4  levels  of 
achievement.  The  rubric  was  applied  three  times  during  each  semester,  to  find  out  if 
students improved their learning throughout the semester. We randomly selected one of 
the  article  published  by  each  student  three  times  (milestones)  during  each  academic 
semester involved in this study. The dimension “meaningful learning” was assessed in the 
news  using  the  rubric  descriptor  by  assigning  each  student  a  level  of  development  and 
therefore a score. 

This study presents the results of the evaluation of the meaningful learning dimension, 
which  measures  whether  "students  associated  specific  content  to  knowledge  previously 
acquired during the course in written and/or oral speeches, using technical concepts with 
relevance".   

5      Outcomes of meaningful learning 

Of  a  total  of  119  students  who  completed  the  course  considered  along  the  different 
semesters,  the  1st  milestone  had  117  records;  the  2nd  111  and  the  3rd  had  119.  To 
determine  if  the  data  collected  in  the  rubric  assessment  were  distributed  normally,  the 
Kolmogorov Smirnov (KS) for a sample was calculated for the first and third milestones. 
For both cases, the asymptotic significance (p) corresponds to 0.00 (Table 1).   

KS for one sample 

Number of contributions per student 
Normal parameters, b 

Extreme differences   

Z de Kolmogorov-Smirnov 
Sig. asintot. (bilateral) 

Mean 
SD 

Absolute 
Positive 
Negative 

1st milestone   

117 
2.18 
0.627 
0.356 
0.356 
-0.305 
3.863 
0.00 

3rd milestone   

119 
2.47 
0.687 
0.358 
0.358 
-0.23 
3.91 
0.00 

 

Table  1.  Descriptive  statistics  by  milestones.  The  contrast  distribution  is  Normal.  b  - 
Calculated based on the data. 

6G. Zurita et al.As p < 0.05 the normal distribution hypothesis is rejected. Therefore, a non-parametric 
statistic was used for the calculation of the mean difference between the 1st milestone and 
the 3rd. As shown in Table 1, observed means are increasing from the 1st and 3rd milestone. 
Moreover, dividing the results according to the four levels of performance, a decrease in 
the  relative  frequency  in  the  first  level  and  an  increase  in  levels  three  and  four,  as 
observed on Table 2. 

To determine whether there is significant difference between the 1st and 3rd milestone, a 
Wilcoxon test for related samples was calculated, with the null hypothesis, meaning that 
the  difference  is  zero.  Being  P  =  0.01  (p  <0.05)  the  null  hypothesis  is  rejected  and 
therefore  there  is  statistically  significant  difference  between  the  mean  scores  on  the 
meaningful learning in the 3rd and 1st milestone. 
 

L-of-P dimension 

1st milestone   

2nd milestone   

3rd milestone   

1 
2 
3 
4 

1.7% 
58.8% 
30.3% 
9.2% 
100.0% 
L-of-P dimension = Levels of performance “Meaningful learning” dimension 

6.3% 
70.3% 
21.6% 
1.8% 
100.0% 

8.5% 
66.7% 
23.1% 
1.7% 
100.0% 

Total 

Table 2.    Relative Frequency 

6  CONCLUSIONS 

One of the contributions of this research is to provide a detailed instructional design of 
a blended learning environment, with particularly attention to how b-learning support 21st 
century skills training and potentially enhance students  meaningful learning. At implementing 
this instructional design, we hope that the second contribution is to present a real experience on 
how to operationalize KSAVE    21st Century Skills framework and test its results.   

B-learning environments have a great potential in higher education. This study shows 
that  a  learning  activity  combining  b-learning  with  the  21st  Century  Skills  may  lead  to 
meaningful  learning.  In  fact,  the  analysis  of  the  experimental  data  shows  a  positive 
development while students performed a learning activity where they had to practice some 
of  these  skills  supported  by  a  b-learning  environment.  Comparing  performance  of  the 
students  at  the  end  of  the  1st  and  3rd  milestones  we  see  a  statistical  meaningful 
improvement.     

This  experience  was  performed  as  a  quasi-experimental  study,  which  means  results 
cannot be generalized to contexts other than the one of the experiment, though it gives a 
positive  feedback  for  utilizing  this  approach.  Future  research  could  produce  additional 
information about student’s satisfaction and skills development. With this kind of research, 
researchers could better measure the impact of blended learning environments in training 
the 21 Century Skills.     

A Blended Learning Environment for Enhancing Meaningful …7References 

2012. 

1.  M. Last, "Towards a Framework for Analyzing and Implementing 21st Century Teaching and Learning 
with Attention to Educational Reform," in Society for Information Technology & Teacher Education 
International Conference, 2012, pp. 3373-3380. 

2.  P. E. Griffin, B. MacGaw, and E. Care, Assessment and teaching of twenty-first century skills: Springer, 

3.  D. P. Ausubel, The acquisition and retention of knowledge: A cognitive view: Springer, 2000. 
4.  F. Alonso, G. López, D. Manrique, and J. M. Viñes, "An instructional model for web-based e-learning 
education with a blended learning process approach," British Journal of educational technology, vol. 36, 
pp. 217-235, 2005. 

5.  J. Arbaugh, M. R. Godfrey, M. Johnson, B. L. Pollack, B. Niendorf, and W. Wresch, "Research in online 
and  blended  learning  in  the  business  disciplines:  Key  findings  and  possible  future  directions,"  The 
Internet and Higher Education, vol. 12, pp. 71-87, 2009. 

6.  J. D. Novak, Learning, creating, and using knowledge: Concept maps as facilitative tools in schools and 

corporations: Taylor & Francis, 2010. 

7.  M. Binkley, O. Erstad, J. Herman, S. Raizen, M. Ripley, M. Miller-Ricci, et al., "Defining twenty-first 

century skills," in Assessment and teaching of 21st century skills, ed: Springer, 2012, pp. 17-66. 

8.  A. I. A. C. Committee, "AACSB assurance of learning standards: An interpretation," An AACSB White 

1-1. 

Paper, vol. 20, 2007. 

Kappan, vol. 94, pp. 8-13, 2012. 

9.  A. R. Saavedra and V. D. Opfer, "Learning 21st-century skills requires 21st-century teaching," Phi Delta 

10.  E. Y. Huang, S. W. Lin, and T. K. Huang, "What type of learning style leads to online participation in the 
mixed-mode  e-learning  environment?  A  study  of  software  usage  instruction,"  Computers  & 
Education,58, pp. 338-349, 2012. 

11.  W. F. McComas, "21st-Century Skills," in The Language of Science Education, ed: Springer, 2014, pp. 

12.  S.  R.  Relles  and  W.  G.  Tierney,  "Understanding  the  Writing  Habits  of  Tomorrow's  Students: 

Technology and College Readiness," The Journal of Higher Education, 84, pp. 477-505, 2013. 

13.  N.  Hoic-Bozic,  V.  Mornar,  and  I.  Boticki,  "A  blended  learning  approach  to  course  design  and 

implementation," Education, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 52, pp. 19-30, 2009. 

14.  M. Martyn, "The Hybrid Online Model: Good Practice," Educause Quarterly, vol. 26, pp. 18-23, 2003. 
15  C. J. Popovich and R. E. Neel, "Characteristics of distance education programs at accredited business 

schools," The American Journal of Distance Education, vol. 19, pp. 229-240, 2005. 

16.  C. W. Holsapple and A. Lee Post, "Defining, Assessing, and Promoting E Learning Success: An 
Information Systems Perspective*," Decision Sciences Journal of Innovative Education, vol. 4, pp. 67-85, 
2006. 

17.  R. Benbunan-Fich, "Improving education and training with IT," Communications of the ACM, vol. 45, 

pp. 94-99, 2002. 

18.  Z. Wan, Y. Fang, and D. J. Neufeld, "The Role of Information Technology in Technology-Mediated 
Learning: A Review of the Past for the Future," Journal of Information Systems Education, vol. 18, pp. 
183-192, 2007. 

19.  J. Cao, J. M. Crews, M. Lin, J. K. Burgoon, and J. F. Nunamaker Jr, "An empirical investigation of 

virtual Interaction in supporting learning," ACM SIGMIS Database, vol. 39, pp. 51-68, 2008. 

20.  R. Santhanam,  S. Sasidharan, and  J.  Webster,  "Using  self-regulatory  learning to  enhance e-learningbased 
information technology training," Information Systems Research, vol. 19, pp. 26-47, 2008. 

21.  V. N. Morphew,  "Web-based learning and instruction:  A  constructivist approach,"  Distance learning 

technologies: Issues, trends and opportunities, pp. 1-15, 2000   

8G. Zurita et al.