Analyzing the Roles of PDA in Meeting Scenarios  

Gustavo Zurita1, Pedro Antunes2, Luís Carriço2, Felipe Baytelman1,  

Marco Sá2, and Nelson Baloian3 

1 Department of Information System and Management of the Economy and Businesses School,  

University of Chile, Diagonal Paraguay 257, Santiago, Chile 

gnzurita@facea.uchile.cl, felipe@baytex.net 

2 Department of Informatics of the Faculty of Sciences of the University of Lisboa,  

Bloco C6, Campo Grande, 1700 Lisboa, Portugal 
{paa, lmc, marcosa}@di.fc.ul.pt 

3 Department of Computer Science of the Engineering School  of the University of Chile, 

Blanco Encalada 2120, Santiago, Chile 

nbaloian@dcc.uchile.cl 

Abstract.  This  paper  proposes  a  conceptual  model  standardizing  the  meeting 
information structures underlying several scenarios o PDA use in meetings. The 
paper characterizes the memory  and process components necessary to support 
XML-based 
interoperability  between  meeting  systems.  The  scenarios, 
information  model  and  architecture  were  validated  through  their  adoption  in 
three  applications,  developed  by  different  teams  and  covering  quite  different 
domains.  The  applications,  encompassing  several  meeting  scenarios  and 
adopting  multifaceted  device  combinations,  demonstrate  the  high  level  of 
interoperability supported by the proposed conceptual model.  

1   Introduction 

PDA  have  been  recently  regarded  as  powerful  CSCW  devices,  combining  several 
well-known  characteristics  such  as  autonomy,  mobility,  pervasiveness,  small  form 
factor and unobtrusiveness with shared information support. One good example is the 
mediation between healthcare personnel in hospital environments, where mobility and 
flexibility are paramount [1]. 

PDA  may  also  assume  a  fundamental  role  in  the  meeting  environment.  PDA 
represent  an  opportunity  to  turn  meetings  more  fluid,  simplifying  the  way  people 
bring  information  into  and  out  of  meetings,  and  serving  as  a  dissemination  tool  for 
meeting-related information throughout the organization [2]. Another important role 
is  revolutionizing  the  role  of  technology  in  meetings,  which  has  always  been 
problematic, since people handle meeting information in very subtle ways. Moreover, 
meeting  processes  are  governed  by  complex  procedures,  which 
in  many 
circumstances require an expert facilitator, who may benefit from PDA support [3]. 

The  complexity  associated  to  meetings  has  always  challenged  information  technology 
 [4].  Meetings  may  be  distributed  in  time  and  space,  posing  significant 
restrictions  to  shared  context  awareness.  They  also  bring  together  people  with  very 
distinct  abilities,  making  it  difficult  to  specify  the  interaction  requirements.  Many 

Y.A. Dimitriadis et al. (Eds.): CRIWG 2006, LNCS 4154, pp. 364 – 380, 2006. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006 

 

Analyzing the Roles of PDA in Meeting Scenarios 

365 

times  people  are  forced  to  plan  the  meeting  process  in  advance,  while  other  times 
such  advance  planning  is  impossible  (e.g.,  emergency  management),  making  technology 
 configuration  and  management  highly  contextual  dependent.  To  complicate 
even  further  these  matters,  meeting  activities  must  be  constantly  adapted  to  the 
groups’ varying perceptions of problems and goals.  

In this complex scenario, in order to make significant advances in the diffusion of 
PDA in meetings, we must start by disentangling such complexity. In this paper we 
analyze  the  different  elements  that  make  up  a  meeting  and  identify  the  relevant 
relationships between these elements and the PDA functionality. Our contributions to 
the state of the art are the following:  
•  Characterize several representative meeting scenarios where PDA may be used to 
best  advantage  as  meeting  tools,  either  because  they  support  information 
management, simplify the group process or increase contextual awareness. 

•  Model  the  information  structure  required  by  the  application  scenarios.  This 
includes  standardizing  the  memory  and  process  elements  belonging  to  the 
meeting information system. 

•  Propose and validate a generic architecture for the above information structure.  

The  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  First,  we  present  the  research  context.  The 
following section is dedicated to describe the meeting scenarios. Next, we present the 
information systems and architectural perspectives of meetings. We then present three 
applications where the proposed architecture has been implemented and used. Finally, 
we present our research conclusions. 

2   Research Context 

Even  before  PDA  became  popular,  researchers  explored  meeting  support  with 
Personal  Computers  (PC).  Known  as  EMS  (Electronic  Meeting  Systems),  these 
solutions offer procedures and mechanisms aimed at achieving effective and productive 
asynchronous and face-to-face meetings [5]. PDA attracted the attention of EMS 
researchers  mostly  because  of  their  increased  user-interface  abilities,  including 
freehand input [6], remote shared view control [7], ubiquitous note taking [2, 8] and 
mobility  [9].  Some  of  these  studies  also  experimented  the  integration  of  PDA  with 
large shared displays in the group context, in a configuration known as Single Display 
Groupware (SDG) [7, 10, 11].  

In this promising research line  we  highlight the development of  several systems: 
NotePals [12], RoamWare [9], Pebbles [7], Notable [8] and ShareNote [10]. NotePals 
and ShareNote allow creating personal notes in PDA, publicizing notes when people 
meet and recording the common notes when people leave meetings. While NotePals 
supports  asynchronous  uploading/downloading  notes  from  a  shared  repository, 
ShareNote  also  supports  synchronous  use.  Notable  is  also  focused  on  annotations, 
building  on  the  Post-It  metaphor  to  integrate  notes  taken  in  meetings  with  other 
documents. RoamWare is mostly focused on supporting mobile face-to-face meetings, 
including  those  held  in  such  places  as  corridors,  relying  on  wireless  technology  to 
detect  the  group  members  and  support  information  sharing.  The  Pebbles  project 
allows PDA to be used in the meeting context as if they were PC mice and keyboards.  

366 

G. Zurita et al. 

We observe that although many of these systems identify some common meeting 
information components (e.g. personal and meeting notes) and processes, they do not 
aim to standardize, integrate or support the interoperability between these information 
and processes components, as proposed in this research.  

3   Meeting Scenarios 

From our point of view, the standardization of meeting information structures should 
be  anchored  on  meeting  scenarios,  providing  rich  descriptions  of  the  system 
functionality and use in terms of goals, inputs, process and outputs in varied contexts 
(see Tables 1 and 2). As we many times observed in our experiments, the following 
scenarios  are  not  mutually  exclusive,  but  rather  characterize  several  primary 
conditions  driving  the  system  use.  Sometimes  it  is  even  possible  to  identify  the 
occurrence of secondary conditions, which may as well be characterized in scenarios.  

Ritual  meeting.  In  the  ritual  meeting  the  most  important  is  socializing  and 
communicating [13]. The reasons behind this type of meeting are varied and include, 
for instance, team building and establishing norms in forming groups [14]. The type 
of participation is mixed and it should not be expected that everyone is holding a PDA 
or knowledgeable about meeting technology.  

The meeting process is usually simple. Considering the lack of preparation and the 
heterogeneity  of  the  participation,  this  type  of  meeting  requires  a  human  facilitator 
who is responsible for conducting the meeting process [3]. We expect that a reduced 
amount  of  information  leaves  the  meeting,  since  outcomes  are  mostly  intangible 
(satisfaction, sense of belonging, knowledge about others, etc.) 

The  PDA  usage  in  this  scenario  is  most  probably  sporadic  and  restricted  to  few 
users.  This  type  of  meeting  could  therefore  be  anchored  in  a  SDG,  so  that  the 
facilitator  may  lead  the  group  activities.  This  scenario  enables  face-to-face  meeting 
participants to collaborate via a shared computer display and simultaneously use PDA 
as input devices or remote commanders [15].  
Deliberate  meeting.  This  type  of  meeting  requires  advance  preparation,  either 
because  the  potential  failure  has  severe  organizational  impact,  or  the  problem  and 
process are complex. The deliberate meeting is mostly related to problem solving and 
decision  making.  The  meeting  participants  are  carefully  selected  and  previously 
informed  about  the  meeting  agenda.  Therefore,  this  scenario  integrates  various 
asynchronous activities accomplished prior to meetings, such as agenda preparation, 
document  sharing  and  preliminary  discussion.  This  scenario  also  emphasizes  postmeeting 
 information,  delivering  the  necessary  context  for  subsequent  activities.  A 
shared  repository  is  necessary  to  maintain  such  an  integrated  perspective.  The 
participants may use their PDA to interact with the repository, updating information 
synchronously during the meeting or asynchronously after the meeting.  

Finally,  we  note  deliberate  meetings  usually  require  highly  structured  processes, 
organizing  and  regulating  the  participants’  interventions.  PDA  may  support  these 
structured processes, like voting or decision-making.  

 

Analyzing the Roles of PDA in Meeting Scenarios 

367 

Meetings  ecosystem.  This  scenario  is  associated  to  an  ill-defined  or  unexpected 
reality.  The  most  significant  difference  to  the  deliberate  meeting  is  that  advance 
planning is compromised and it is up to the group to adopt the best strategy to achieve 
the intended goals (which may also be compromised [16]). 

The meeting may then be regarded as an aggregate of sub-meetings with different 
goals,  a  behavior  that  has  been  observed  in  collaboratories  [17].  PDA  support  this 
organized chaos: setting up sub-groups; defining tasks and sub-tasks; and supporting 
information exchange and awareness while moving through different contexts.  

The shared repository and SDG may be required only in certain cases. There may 
exist no shared repository when the participants only share notes with the sub-groups 
where they are collaborating, but do not need to integrate and share this information. 
On the other hand, when the meeting outcomes are necessary in other meetings, they 
can be shared through the repository. As pointed out by [17], this scenario could use a 
SDG,  allowing  the  participants  to  obtain  situation  awareness  and  use  collaborative 
tools to enhance the meeting experience (e.g., sharing small text messages or voting). 
While  the  SDG  provides  situation  awareness,  PDA  may  be  used  to  quickly  interact 
with these features.  
Creative/design  meeting.  This  type  of  meeting  is  mostly  focused  on  ideas 
generation.  The  focus  on  creativity  may  be  supported  with  the  brainstorming 
technique  [18],  while  design  builds  upon  creativity  with  discussion,  assessment, 
decision-making and planning. PDA may support the design process mostly through 
collaborative  sketching.  For  instance,  a  group  of  architects  may  work  jointly  on  a 
sketch at a construction site [19].  

The most natural data-entry mode for design is the stylus, because it reproduces the 
pen-and-paper  mental  model  [20].  Sketching  affords  the  visual  symbols  and  spatial 
relationships necessary to express ideas in a rapid and efficient way [21]. This type of 
activity is also called brainsketching [20]. The ability to immerse the design activities 
in  the  physical  context  affords  the  meeting  participants  to  immediately  explore  the 
proposed  solutions,  thus  enhancing  creativity  and  productivity.  Note  that  a  shared 
repository  is  dispensable  in  this  scenario,  because  in  most  situations  input  is  not 
necessary and the outcome does not require further work by the group. 

Ad-hoc meeting. Most  meetings  are  ad-hoc:  unscheduled,  spontaneous, lacking an 
agenda, and with an opportunistic selection of participants [22]. This type of meeting 
happens  anywhere  and  anytime.  During  an  ad-hoc  meeting,  the  participants  tend  to 
mix  individual  and  collective  activities.  In  this  situation,  a  PDA  may  be  used 
individually,  but  the  synchronization  with  other  PDA  offers  the  group  an  overall 
perception of the work being carried out.  

This  scenario  emphasizes  the  opportunities  of  PDA  to  overcome  several 
restrictions imposed by the environment, e.g. the lack of a whiteboard, table, paper, 
etc.  Furthermore,  PDA  may  automatically  obtain  information  about  the  meeting 
location and other PDA in the vicinity, thus preserving the meeting context.  

Once  the  ad-hoc  meeting  has  ended,  it  has  produced  various  types  of  outcomes, 
consisting  on  private  and  public  data  such  as  agreements,  to-do  lists,  deadlines  and 
schedules.  PDA  may  serve  to  upload  this  data  into  the  shared  repository,  either 

368 

G. Zurita et al. 

immediately or later on, depending on the available connectivity. This functionality is 
fundamental to construct a coherent view of what happened in the meeting. 

Learning  meeting.  Learning  meetings  are  very  different  from  other  types  of 
meetings,  as  they  are  more  focused  on  the  use  of  the  technology  to  enhance  the 
learning experience [23]. In this scenario teachers may interactively present a lecture 
through the system or involve students in problem solving activities.  

According  to  [23],  the  degree  of  anonymity  supported  by  PDA  in  this  scenario 
helps reducing evaluation apprehension by allowing  group  members to  submit their 
ideas  without having to speak up in front of the  group; and parallel communication 
aids  reducing  domination,  since  more  persons  may  express  their  ideas  at  the  same 
time.  This  scenario  also  emphasizes  the  PDA  support  to  process  structures,  which 
may  help  reducing  coordination  problems  by  keeping  the  group  focused  on  the 
agenda. This scenario includes a wide spectrum of activities, including the generation 
and organization of ideas, group analysis, decision making, group writing and action 
planning.  

Table 1. Meeting scenarios and associated functionality 

Major goals 
-Social interaction 

Meeting Input 
None 

Attached documents, 
agenda, attendees list

Meetings ecosystem   Unknown problem solving  Ill defined agenda 
On-site gathered 
Creative/design 
material (e.g. 
building snapshot) 
None 

Ad-hoc 

Meeting 
Ritual 

Deliberate 

Learning 

-Problem solving  
-Decision making 
-Information integration 

-Brainstorming  
-Brainsketching  
-Collaborative design 
-Opportunistic decisionmaking 

-Brainstorming and 
brainsketching 
-Collaborative writing 
-Problem solving 
-Developing social skills  

Class planning, 
pedagogical 
practices and 
materials (e.g. 
reading documents) 

Meeting process  Meeting Output 
Group formation, 
Simple, conducted 
by the facilitator 
intangible information 
Report and other formal 
Highly structured, 
conducted by the 
meeting elements 
facilitator 
Ill defined 
Unstructured with 
free collaboration 

Organized chaos 
New ideas and sketches 

Simple 

Structured, 
conducted by the 
teacher 

-Report 
-Individual notes 
Pedagogical 
achievements: new 
ideas and solutions 
(individual or group 
writing) 

Table 2. Meeting scenarios and associated components 

Meeting 
Ritual 

Deliberate 

Meetings ecosystem 

Creative/design 
Ad-hoc 

Learning 

 

PDA 
-Input device 
-Manage SDG 
-Manage meeting data 
-Manage meeting process 
-Manage SDG 
-Synchronize context 
-Publish progress 
-Move data across groups  
-Input device 
-Substitute SDG 
-Share notes 
-Input device 
-Share notes 
-Brainstorming and voting 

SDG 
Necessary to focus the 
participants attention 
-Necessary to focus the 
participants attention 
-Manage meeting process 
Necessary for situation 
awareness  

None 
None 

Desirable to focus the 
participants 

Repository 
None 

Context awareness 

None 

None 
Overall perception of 
outcomes 
Preand 
postmeeting 

information 

 

 

 

Analyzing the Roles of PDA in Meeting Scenarios 

369 

4   Information Systems Perspective 

Our main goal in this section is to characterize meetings from an information systems 
perspective. This goal is relatively difficult because of the high degree of informality 
associated to several meeting scenarios. Nevertheless, the following characterization 
in  terms  of  meeting  memory  and  meeting  process  codifies  and  integrates  our 
knowledge about electronic meetings.  
Meeting  memory.  The  meeting  memory  is  an  organized  persistent  storage  of  the 
information  produced  or  manipulated  in  relation  to  meetings.  We  identify  three 
fundamental  meeting  memory elements (Fig. 1): agenda,  meeting data, and  meeting 
report  [2].  The  agenda  is  a  critical  element  to  successfully  manage  meetings,  since 
meetings tend to crystallize their actions around it [24], and is mandatory in planned 
meetings.  The  prototypical  agenda  has  two  different  types  of  information:  a  list  of 
topics or goals that the group must deal with; or a series of steps that the group should 
execute to accomplish their goals.  

Meeting
Memory

Meeting

Data
Purpose, 
Contents, 
Media, Who, 
When, Where

Agenda

Topics/Goals

Steps

Report
Selection, 
Structure, 
Format

Persistent

Conversation

Summary

Model
Based

Memory
Elements

IBIS
Issues, 
Positions, 
Arguments

Hypertext

Tree

Links, nodes

Nodes, leaves

Fig. 1. Memory elements 

The  meeting  data  concerns  all  the  data  distilled  during  meetings.  The  major 
attributes associated to the meeting data are [25]: purpose; contents; media used; who 
is involved in producing the data item; when was the data item produced and where 
should the data item be produced or used. Several information models are adopted to 
structure meeting data. Two very common models are hypertext and IBIS [26]. The 
case  studies  discussed  in  this  paper  utilize  trees  (Nomad  and  LightMeet)  and  the 
hypertext model (JointTS).  

The  meeting  report  aggregates  the  tangible  outcomes  of  meetings  and  is 
characterized by the particular selection, structure and format of the report items. We 
identified four different report types associated to electronic meetings: 

•  Persistent  conversation  –  Transcripts  of  all  the  information  exchanged  in 

meetings, most often produced by automatic transcription tools.  

•  Summary  of  the  outcomes  –  Referencing  only  the  pieces  of  information 
considered  most  important,  like  voting  results.  These  summaries  are  in 
general generated by humans. 

370 

G. Zurita et al. 

•  Model based information structures – When the underlying information model 

is applied to automatically produce meeting reports.  

•  A  collection  of  group  memory  elements  generated  and  structured  during 
meetings – This includes selected elements like action plans and calendaring 
information, commonly produced in meetings. 

Meeting  Process.  The  meeting  process  structures  the  activities  executed  by  the 
meeting participants (Fig. 2). The nature of these activities changes as the participants 
move  forward  towards  their  goals.  Therefore,  we  typify  activities  in  accordance  to 
that progression and consider three increasing levels of detail: 

•  Level 1 – The meeting as a whole, i.e. one single activity; 
•  Level 2 – The partition of the meeting process as a sequence of activities; and 

the decomposition of these activities in sub-activities; 

•  Level  3  –  The  fragmentation  of  the  meeting  in  an  intricate  collection  of 

elementary individual interventions.  

Intervention

Time, Author, 
Validity

Activity

Level of detail

1

*

Process

Pattern

Pre

In

Post

Fig. 2. Process elements 

 

The level 1 characterizes the meeting process while maintaining the perspective of 
the  whole.  This  allows  typifying  meetings  in  genres  [25],  e.g.,  briefings,  progress 
report meetings, staff meetings and management meetings. 

The second level focus on the decision structure. This follows a logical view over 
decision making that is recurrent in literature [27], where the goal is divided in partial 
goals  that  can  be  accomplished  in  a  systematic  way.  Furthermore,  this  level  also 
regards  meeting  processes  as  decomposable  in  multiple  levels  of  detail,  with  goals 
and sub-goals. For instance, [4] propose a decomposition with several basic patterns 
like diverge, converge, organize, elaborate, abstract and evaluate. 

Finally, in level 3 the  meeting process is characterized according to the  flows of 
individual  interventions  produced  by  the  participants.  The  generic  attributes 
associated to these interventions are: 

•  Time  –  The  moment  when  the  intervention  is  produced.  Based  on  this 

attribute, we can characterize meetings as synchronous or asynchronous.  

•  Author – The person that produces an intervention may be identified or not. 
This  factor  can  have  an  important  role  in  the  process  results.  Several 
researchers have reported the positive effects of anonymity in the interaction 
process (e.g. [28]). 

•  Validity –The validity corresponds to the time during which the intervention 

can be accessible. The validity has repercussions on the meeting memory. 

 

Analyzing the Roles of PDA in Meeting Scenarios 

371 

Assuming a complementary view of the meeting process, the process activities can 
also be classified according to what is designated as the meeting lifecycle. A detailed 
analysis  of  meetings  allows  verifying  that  the  meeting  lifecycle  consists  of  three 
stages:  (1)  the  pre-meeting  stage,  considering  activities  that  have  to  be  executed 
before  the  meeting;  (2)  the  in-meeting  stage,  considering  activities  accomplished 
during the meeting; and (3) the post-meeting stage, considering activities that may be 
required afterwards.  

5   Architectural Perspective 

We  now  describe  the  generic  architecture  enabling  the  features  and  topologies 
suggested  by  the  meeting  scenarios  and  information  system  components  described 
above. In this architecture, illustrated in Fig. 3, any device (including PDA, repository 
and  SDG)  can  establish  network  connections  with  other  devices  using  either 
automatic  detection  or  direct  IP  connection.  Users  interact  with  the  PDA  and  SDG 
through  pen-based  gestures,  mouse  and  keyboard.  Once  an  individual  interaction 
requires meeting management, the action itself is encoded in XML and delivered to 
all other devices, including the shared repository if persistent storage is necessary.  

 

Fig. 3. System framework configured for PDAs, SDG or a Centralized Server 

Of course, this generic architecture may be implemented in slight different ways. 
For instance, one of the applications described below uses a message server directly 
connected  to  the  SDG  and  communicating  with  every  PDA  through  point-to-point 
channels. When a user interacts with the PDA, e.g. to write an idea, the PDA sends an 
encoded XML message to the server, which sends the message to the other PDA and 
SDG; and applies locally, on the SDG, the corresponding interaction. When the users 
interact directly with the SDG, XML messages are distributed from the server to the 
PDA. We implemented other instances of this framework in Java and .NET platforms 
and tested them in several meeting scenarios, as described in the next section. 

372 

G. Zurita et al. 

6   Applications 

6.1   Nomad 

Nomad is based on the proposed system architecture to support creative/design, hadhoc 
 and  learning  meetings  using  PDA.  This  emphasizes  the  ability  to  generate  and 
share meeting notes using sketches and writing. Fig. 4 shows a screenshot of Nomad 
during a typical design meeting. 

Mode icon 
currently set to 
Work Mode 

Private notes menu 

  

Fig. 4. Nomad screenshot 

Annotations and sketches are produced from freehand inputs with the PDA stylus. 
Nomad  recognizes  special  gestures,  which  trigger  certain  information  management 
functionalities. This is done after the user raises the stylus tip, when the system tries 
to match the stylus movement with a list of pre-defined gestures. Two examples are 
the select and cut functions illustrated in Fig. 5. The select function utilizes either the 
single  click  gesture  or  a  more  complex  gesture  designated  double  lasso,  which 
consists in double surrounding an area with a closed shape. The cut function utilizes a 
cross gesture to remove strokes from the screen.  

 
   

 

a. 

 
       
b. 

Fig. 5. Double lasso gesture for complex selecting and cross gestures for cutting 

Since the PDA workspace is very restricted, Nomad organizes meeting information 
in a tree structure, using hierarchical pages. The pages are associated to parent nodes, 
usually representing a label for the page. To create a page, the user must write or draw 
a  title  and  then  surround  the  title  with  a  partial  rectangle,  as  shown  in  Fig.  6.  The 
system  recognizes  this  gesture  as  a  node  creation  and  associates  a  new  page  to  the 
selected node.  

 

Analyzing the Roles of PDA in Meeting Scenarios 

373 

Fig. 6. Surrounding title to create node 

 

Current location is 
highlighted 

Document tree view 
icon is highlighted 
to inform current 
system state 

Votes are 
displayed as 
pie graphs

Attendees list

Group icon with 
current node’s 
attendance

 

 

Fig. 7. Overview window 

As  the  information  tree  may  become  very  large,  Nomad  includes  an  overview 
window  allowing  the  user  to  move  around  and  zoom  in  and  out  using  predefined 
gestures (Fig. 7). Clicking on the overview leads the users to the corresponding nodes.  
The  overview  also  gives  awareness  on  who  is  participating  in  the  meeting  or 
working  on  a  node  (see  Fig.  7).  Another  functionality  allows  users  to  vote  for  or 
against nodes. This functionality requires a designated person, the meeting facilitator, 
to request the participants to vote on one or several designated nodes. Then, the other 
participants  vote  using  predefined  gestures,  as  shown  in  Fig.  8.  The  results  are 
represented  as  pie  charts,  where  the  green  portion  represents  positive  votes,  red 
represents negative votes and black represents users who have not voted.  

 
 
 

a. 

b. 

 
 
 
 

Fig. 8. Voting gestures (note also the voting results) 

The  Nomad  system  operates  in  the  synchronous  mode,  relying  on  peer-to-peer 
detection and communication to share meeting information. The system may support 
a  shared  repository  and  SDG,  although  no  dedicated  components  have  been 
developed yet. The whole information tree is represented in XML, and may be stored 
and retrieved in that format. Furthermore, Nomad allows users to work individually, 
generating local XML files and, when necessary or convenient, import local files into 
a meeting. The system provides two special import options: one where the individual 

374 

G. Zurita et al. 

and  meeting  trees  are  merged,  another  where  the  individual  tree  becomes  a  new 
version of the meeting tree.  

Nomad can also be used for supporting collaborative learning activities, especially 
for collaborative problem solving and discussions. Students may exchange their ideas 
and  solutions  with  the  help  of  sketches.  The  teacher  may  also  benefit  from  on-line 
assessment of the students’ work, making this a motivating scenario. 

6.2   LightMeet 

LightMeet is a meeting support system implementing one variation of the architecture 
described in this paper, having the SDG, centralized repository and PDA components; 
and  using  direct  IP  connections  to  exchange  XML  messages.  LightMeet  supports 
face-to-face meetings centered on the SDG, allowing participants to manage private 
meeting  information  using  PDA.  Because  of  this  focus  on  the  SDG,  LightMeet  is 
mostly adequate to ritual and deliberate meetings, and some specific instances of the 
learning scenario where the presence of the SDG may be beneficial.   

LightMeet adopts a radical approach to the information system: all meeting data is 
organized in a tree. This not only includes the typical meeting data, such as proposed 
solutions, comments and priorities; but also the agenda and report, which are treated 
by the system as “special” nodes. Our fundamental reasons for adopting this radical 
approach  was  that  we  aimed  to  develop  a  very  simple  mental  model  of  electronic 
meetings,  so  that  any  participant  not  familiarized  with  them  could  nevertheless 
participate and interact with the system.  

As shown in Fig. 9, the SDG allows the meeting participants to create and manage 
the meeting information using the “drag & drop” and “explorer” metaphors that are 
now very common in many technological devices. Observe that the participants may 
have tabs which display specific portions of the tree, such as, for instance, the agenda. 
The admin tab is dedicated to manage the connections to PDA.  

Fig. 9. LightMeet SDG component 

 

 

Analyzing the Roles of PDA in Meeting Scenarios 

375 

Each  PDA  connected  to  the  SDG  operates  as  a  dynamic  cursor  over  the  tree 
available in the SDG, i.e. one single node and its immediate sub-nodes are displayed 
in the PDA (Fig. 10). When the user moves around the tree, the PDA sends a message 
to the SDG requesting the corresponding node and sub-nodes. The participants may 
freely  create,  delete,  move  and  modify  the  nodes.  Since  the  agenda  and  report  are 
special  nodes  (e.g.  they  cannot  be  deleted),  the  PDA  users  have  shortcuts  to  easily 
move there. The PDA also have private spaces where users can privately edit nodes. 
There is also support for publishing these private nodes in the SDG.  

The  SDG  adopts  an  optimistic  approach  to  concurrency  control,  allowing  the 
participants  to  freely  manipulate  the  nodes,  and  relying  on  the  face-to-face 
interactions to resolve any occurring problems. As we observed in our experiments, 
the  information  management  is  sometimes  chaotic  but  the  meeting  participants  can 
easily define a social protocol. Sometimes, when there is a definite need to control the  
information management, the interaction is restricted to the SDG. 

The LightMeet system  was evaluated in a laboratory experiment  with two groups of 
users with different levels of proficiency with computers. One group had five participants 
with low computer skills, including five persons with degrees in different fields, such as 
economics,  management  and  pre-kinder.  The  other  group  had  six  participants  highly 
proficient with computers, mostly with degrees in informatics and mathematics.  

The  experiments  were  conducted  with  short  briefings  about  the  meeting 
technology,  followed  by  face-to-face  electronic  meetings,  and  concluded  with  a 
questionnaire  with  25  questions  based  on  SUMI  (Software  Usability  Measurement 
Inventory).  The  meetings  involved  the  discussion  of  the  risks  of  underpinning  a 
home-based business, using pre-defined agendas resembling SWAT analysis.  

Fig. 10. LightMeet PDA component 

 

The  obtained  results  indicate  that  the  affective  criteria  (user  friendliness  and 
emotional  reaction)  where  the  most  positively  evaluated,  followed  by  the  ease  of 
learning,  control,  and  efficiency.  The  most  negative  criteria  concerned  the  system 
utility. More details about the system and evaluation results can be found in [29]. 

376 

G. Zurita et al. 

6.3   JoinTS 

The  major  goal  of  the  JoinTS  (Joint  psychological  Therapy  Support  [30])  system  is 
exploring PDA support to psychotherapy. The psychotherapy processes occur in several 
scenarios, two of them currently covered by JoinTS: individual and group meetings.  

Individual  Meetings.  Individual  psychotherapy  meetings  are  complex  and 
demanding.  They  require  numerous  activities  performed  by  a  pair  of  participants, 
constituted  by  a  therapist  and  a  patient.  The  therapy  meetings  are  fundamentally 
centered  on  face-to-face  interactions,  held  in  the  therapist’s  office,  but  are  also 
inherently related to individual activities performed in between meetings [31].  

On  the  therapist’s  side,  we  account  for  the  preparation  and  follow-up  of  face-toface 
meetings, while on the patient’s side we include multiple activities prescribed by 
the therapist, such as responding to questionnaires, planning daily life and registering 
thoughts  throughout  the  day.  JoinTS  supports  all  this  information  management, 
including  the  customization  of  questionnaires  and  forms,  form  filling,  note  taking 
during  face-to-face  meetings,  registering  thoughts,  visualizing  and  analyzing  the 
patient’s accomplishments (Fig. 11).  

 
 
              

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 11. Screenshots of two JoinTS tools developed for different PDA. Letft: The therapist’s 
questionnaire  customization  tool  developed  for  Palm.  Right:  The  therapy  tool  developed  for 
Pocket PC. 

The initial therapy steps may be classified as ritual meetings, where the therapist 
discusses and sets up the  stage for addressing the patient’s problems. Most of these 
activities  are  conversation-based  and  collaborative.  After  the  main  problems  are 
defined,  the  therapist  adopts  a  scenario  more  similar  to  deliberate  meetings,  since 
therapy  meetings  become  more  carefully  planned  and  follow  a  strict  agenda. 
Homework  is  given  to  the  patient  and  the  results  are  analyzed  and  discussed  in 
subsequent meetings.  

The role of PDA supporting  this process  occurs in  multiple  ways: (1) supporting 
the  therapist’s  note  taking  during  meetings,  without  obstructing  the  face-to-face 
interactions;  (2)  supporting  the  patient’s  individual  tasks  in  between  sessions;  (3) 
supporting the exchange of questionnaires between the therapist and patient; and (4) 
functioning as a SDG, focusing the patient’s attention to specific issues presented by 

 

Analyzing the Roles of PDA in Meeting Scenarios 

377 

the  therapist  during  sessions.  We  specifically  emphasize  the  important  role  of  PDA 
assisting  the  patient’s  individual  tasks  in  between  sessions,  presenting  hints  and 
suggestions whenever an abnormal behavior is detected, according to rules previously 
specified by the therapist.  

Group sessions. Individual therapy is frequently complemented with group therapy. 
Here,  meetings  involve  several  patients  sharing  the  same  pathology.  Although  the 
main  activities  are  similar  to  those  described  for  individual  therapy,  goals  and 
procedures  diverge  for  each  scenario.  Generally,  questionnaires  are  filled  cooperatively 
 and  thought  registration  is  many  times  subject  to  consensus.  Overall,  every 
activity  requires  the  intervention  and  participation  of  all  patients,  always  guided  by 
the  therapist.  On  occasions,  therapists  work  in  pairs  to  accommodate  the  various 
parallel  tasks  that  have  to  be  accomplished  during  meetings.  Consequently,  two 
groups  emerge.  The  first  one  is  composed  by  the  therapists,  who  exchange  specific 
information between them, whilst the second group is composed by patients. 

Fig. 12. Left: Screenshot of the JoinTS SDG, showing the selected patient’s PDA. Right: The 
list  of  patients  is  selected  on  the  therapists’  PDA.  You  may  also  observe  the  chat  space 
allowing therapists to share notes. 

                   

 

As  with  the  individual  therapy,  initial  meetings  focus  on  the  adaptation  to  the 
procedures and group. These ritual meetings are then followed by deliberate meetings, 
with  more clear objectives and schedules. Therapists control the topics and subjects 
addressed  during  these  meetings,  communicating  simultaneously  with  several 
patients. This scenario requires a SDG to focus all the participants on the objectives 
and facilitate collaboration. PDA support the various underlying activities, including 
control  of  the  SDG  (see  Fig.  12).  Also,  in  this  scenario,  the  JoinTS  system  uses  a 
shared repository to preserve the therapists’ annotations and support reviewing patient 
records  and  questionnaires.  The  therapists,  using  their  PDA,  may  retrieve  relevant 
information from the repository and publish it in the SDG.  

Another  possibility  that  has  been  explored  is  supporting  private  communication 
between  the  two  therapists  using  PDA  (see  Fig.  12).  This  subgroup  is  particularly 
 

378 

G. Zurita et al. 

important when critical issues emerge. In many cases, resolving these critical issues 
becomes  a  major  goal,  turning  the  therapists  particularly  active.  Then,  a  meeting 
ecosystem  scenario  emerges.  The  communication  between  therapists  is  considered 
uncomfortable  for  patients  in  normal  meetings  but,  using  PDA,  these  private 
conversations are less conspicuous.  

Considering  the  JoinTS  architecture,  the  system  utilizes  wireless  communication 
and  relies  on  a  centralized  server  to  synchronize  and  control  the  information  flows 
between  the  participants,  shared  repository  and  SDG.  There  is  one  communication 
channel  available  for  sending  information  from  PDA  to  the  central  repository  and 
then either to the SDG or the therapists’ PDA. There is a second channel available for 
receiving information directly from the therapists’ devices, using multicast.  

The  shared  repository  preserves  all  the  information  exchanged  by  the  system  as 
well  as  descriptions  of  the  meeting  activities.  Each  intervention  is  stored  with  its 
validity, author and time. A log for each participant is generated, as well as a log for 
the  whole  meeting.  Therapists  may  trace  the  patients  and  groups’  evolution  from 
meeting to meeting. All this information is preserved and exchanged in XML format.  

7    Conclusions 

In  this  paper  we  provide  an  integrated  perspective  over  electronic  meeting  systems 
and how  users  may  utilize PDA in  meeting environments, highlighting the physical 
and information architectures. Regarding the physical system, we identify three major 
system components: PDA, SDG and  shared repository.  Considering the information 
system  architecture,  we  identify  several  information  components  related  with  the 
meeting memory and the meeting process.  

The fundamental implications drawn from this research result from the opportunity 
to make electronic meeting systems interoperable to a level that has not been achieved 
before, allowing different devices (in our case, PDA, SDG, repository) to exchange, 
share and manipulate meeting-related information in an integrated way. Such level of 
interoperability  is  possible  because  of  two  fundamental  reasons:  (1)  we  support 
information exchange using the XML standard, thus allowing very different devices 
to  plug  in  the  meeting  system;  and  (2)  we  standardized  the  meeting  information 
structure around common  memory and process components, such as agenda, report, 
and other meeting data structures, like trees.  

This  research  emerged  from  three  independent  research  groups,  working  in 
different  fields  and  developing  their  own  prototypes,  but  nevertheless  sharing  a 
common understanding about the fundamental nature of meetings, the important roles 
that  PDA  may  assume  in  meetings  and  the  requirements  to  make  interoperable 
meeting  systems.  We  strongly  believe  the  proposed  architecture  benefits  from  such 
varied and complementary perspectives, as well as parallel development efforts. 

Acknowledgements.  This  paper  was  partially  supported  by  Fondecyt  1050601,  DIUniversidad 
de Chile Nro. I2 04/01-2, and the Portuguese Foundation for Science and 
technology, Project POSI/EIA/62473/2004. 

 

Analyzing the Roles of PDA in Meeting Scenarios 

379 

References 

[1]  Muñoz,  M.,  Rodriguez,  M.,  Favela,  J.,  Martinez-Garcia,  A.,  González,  V.:  ContextAware 
Mobile Communication in Hospitals. Computer 36 (2003) 38-46 

[2]  Costa,  C.,  Antunes,  P.,  Dias,  J.:  Ems/PDA:  Connecting  Meetings  with  People  in 
Organisations.  Proceedings  of  the  24th  Information  Systems  Research  Seminar  in 
Scandinavia, IRIS 24, Ulvik in Hardanger, Norway (2001) 

[3]  Antunes, P., Ho, T.: The Design of a GDSS Meeting Preparation Tool. Group Decision 

and Negotiation 10 (2001) 5-25 

[4]  Briggs,  R.,  Vreede,  G.,  Nunamaker,  J.:  Collaboration  Engineering  with  Thinklets  to 
Pursue  Sustained  Success  with  Group  Support  Systems.  Journal  of  Management 
Information Systems 19 (2003) 31-64 

[5]  Jessup, L., Valacich, J. (eds.): Group Support Systems. Macmillan Publishing Company, 

New York (1993) 

[6]  Davis,  R.,  Lin,  J.,  Brotherton,  J.,  Landay,  J.,  Price,  M.,  Schilit,  B.:  A  Framework  for 

Sharing Handwritten Notes. ACM Press, San Francisco, California (1998) 

[7]  Myers, B., Stiel, H., Gargiulo, R.: Collaboration Using Multiple Pdas Connected to a Pc. 
Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work. ACM 
Press, Seattle, WA (1998) 285-294 

[8]  Baldonado,  M.,  Cousins,  S.,  Gwizdka,  J.,  Paepcke,  A.:  Notable:  At  the  Intersection  of 
Annotations and Handheld Technology. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 1927. 
Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg (2000) 100-113 

[9]  Wiberg, M.: Roamware: An Integrated Architecture for Seamless Interaction in between 
Mobile Meetings. Proceedings of the 2001 International ACM SIGGROUP Conference 
on Supporting Group Work. ACM Press, Boulder, Colorado (2001) 288-297 

[10]  Greenberg, S., Boyle, M., Laberge, J.: Pdas and Shared Public Displays: Making Personal 

Information Public, and Public Information Personal. Personal Technologies (1999)  

[11]  Stewart, J., Bederson, B., Druin, A.: Single Display Groupware: A Model for Co-Present 
Collaboration.  Proceedings  of  the  SIGCHI  conference  on  Human  factors  in  computing 
systems: the CHI is the limit. ACM Press, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania (1999) 286-293 

[12]  Davis,  R.,  Landay,  J.,  Chen,  V.,  Huang,  J.,  Lee,  R.,  Li,  F.,  Lin,  J.,  Morrey  III,  C., 
Schleimer, B., Price, M., Schilit, B.: Notepals: Lightweight Note Sharing by the Group, 
for the Group. Proceedings of the CHI 99 Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems. ACM Press, Pittsburg (1999) 338-345 

[13]  The 3M Meeting Management Team: Mastering Meetings. McGraw-Hill, Inc., New York 

(1994) 

[14]  Webne-Behrman, H.: The Practice of Facilitation. Quorum Books, Westport, Connecticut 

(1998) 

[15]  Myers,  B.:  The  Pebbles  Project:  Using  Pcs  and  Hand-Held  Computers  Together; 
Demonstration  Extended  Abstract.  Adjunct  Proceedings  CHI'2000:  Human  Factors  in 
Computing Systems. ACM Press, The Hague, The Netherlands (2000) 14-15 

[16]  Rosenhead,  J.  (ed.):  Rational  Analysis  for  a  Problematic  World.  Jonh  Wiley  &  Sons, 

Chichester, England (1989) 

[17]  Mark, G.: Extreme Collaboration. Communications of the ACM 45 (2002) 89-93 
[18]  Osborn, A.: Applied Imagination. Charles Scribner's Sons, New York (1963) 
[19]  May, A., Mitchell, V.: Opportunities and Challenges for Location Aware Computing in 

the Construction Industry. Proceedings of Mobile HCI (2005) 255-258 

380 

G. Zurita et al. 

[20]  Van der Lugt, R.: Functions of Sketching in Design Idea Generation Meetings. Proceedings 
of the 4th conference on creativity and cognition. ACM Press, Loughborough, UK 
(2002) 72-79 

[21]  Forbus, K., Ferguson, R., Usher, J.: Towards a Computational Model of Sketching. IUI 
'01: Proceedings of the 6th international conference on Intelligent user interfaces, Santa 
Fe, New Mexico (2001) 77-83 

[22]  Romano,  N.,  Nunamaker,  J.:  Meeting  Analysis:  Findings  from  Research  and  Practice. 
Proceedings of the 34th Hawaii International Conference on Systems Science, Hawaii (2001) 
[23]  Tyran, G., Sherpherd, M.: Collaborative Technology in the Classrom:  A Review of the 
GSS  Research  and  a  Researh  Framework.  Information  Technology  and  Management  2 
(2001) 395-418 

[24]  Niederman,  F.,  Volkema,  R.:  Influence  of  Agenda  Creation  and  Use  on  Meeting 
Activities and Outcomes: Report on Initial Results. Proceedings of the 1996 Conference 
on ACM SIGCPR/SIGMIS Conference, Denver, Colorado (1996) 192-205 

[25]  Antunes, P., Costa, C., Pino, J.: The Use of Genre Analysis in the Design of Electronic 

Meeting Systems. Information Research 11 (2006)  

[26]  Conklin,  J.,  Begeman,  M.:  Gibis:  A  Hypertext  Tool  for  Exploratory  Policy  Discussion. 

ACM Transactions on Office Information Systems 6 (1988) 303-331 

[27]  Ho,  T.,  Antunes,  P.:  Developing  a  Tool  to  Assist  Electronic  Facilitation  of  DecisionMaking 
 Groups.  Fifth  International  Workshop  on  Groupware,  CRIWG  '99.  IEEE  CS 
Press, Cancun, Mexico (1999) 243-252 

[28]  Connolly, T., Jessup, L., Valacich, J.: Effects of Anonymity and Evaluative Tone on Idea 

Generation in Computer-Mediated Groups. Management Science 36 (1990) 689-703 

[29]  Pereira,  L.:  Electronic  Meetings  with  PDA.  Department  of  Informatics.  Faculty  of 

Sciences of the University of Lisboa (2006) 

[30]  Carriço, L., Sá, M.: Hand-Held Psychotherapy Artifacts. Proceedings of the 11th Human 

Computer Interaction International Conference, Las Vegas, USA (2006) 

[31]  Carriço, L., Sá, M., Antunes, P.: Mobile Devices for Active Psychotherapy. Proceedings 

of the 8th Int. Conference on Enterprise Information Systems, Paphos, Cyprus (2006) 

