Chapter 17
Development of a Mobile Situation  
Awareness Tool Supporting Disaster Recovery 
of Business Operations

Pedro Antunes1, Claudio Sapateiro2, Gustavo Zurita3, and Nelson Baloian4

1 Faculty of Sciences, University of Lisbon, Portugal
2 Systems  and  Informatics  Department,  School  of  Technology,  Polytechnic  Institute  of  Setúbal, 
Portugal
3 Management  Control  and  Information  Systems  Department,  Business  School,  Universidad  de 
Chile, Chile
4 Department of Computer Science, University of Chile, Santiago de Chile, Chile

Abstract  Situation  awareness  (SA)  is  deemed  essential  when  tackling  situations 
 that  are  characterised  by  complexity,  hard-to-define  causal  relationships, 
dynamic  changes,  and  lack  of  information.  This  chapter  describes  the  development 
 of  a  model  and  tool  to  support  collaborative  construction  of  SA.  The 
proposed  model  organises  awareness  information  elements  according  to  situation 
 dimensions,  dimensional  elements,  and  correlations  between  dimensional 
elements. The approach provides a strategic view of the situation and a structure 
supporting  concurrent  information  updates.  The  developed  tool  supports  collaborative 
information management using mobile devices and pen-based interaction.
 The chapter also reports a case study that has employed the model and 
tool  to  support  the  disaster  recovery  (DR)  of  business  operations.The  adopted 
research approach is exploratory and theory-driven. The evaluation task adopted 
the inspection method, employing experts in critical infrastructure maintenance. 
The obtained results indicate the model and tool are adequate to the types of disruptive 
events faced by  critical infrastructure maintenance teams. The obtained 
results also indicate the proposed model and tool are regarded as mostly important 
to less  experienced members; and also fundamental to the development of 
emergency plans.

Keywords  Collaborative  situation  awareness  •  Disaster  recovery  •  Mobility 
 support • Decision support systems

P. Antunes (*) 
Faculty of Sciences, University of Lisbon, Portugal 
e-mail: paa@di.fc.ul.pt

F. Burstein et al. (eds.), Supporting Real Time Decision-Making,  
Annals of Information Systems 13, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-7406-8_17,  
© Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2011

337

338

1 

 Introduction

P. Antunes et al.

The Cynefin framework has been developed with the purpose of understanding the 
impact  of  complexity  on  organisational  decision  making  (Snowden  and  Boone 
2007). This framework distinguishes four main decision-making contexts: simple, 
complicated,  complex,  and  chaotic.  Stable  and  straightforward   relationships 
between causes and effects characterise the simple context. In these circumstances, 
the  most  adequate  decision-making  strategy  is  selecting  an   available  plan.  The 
complicated context is associated with multiple right answers for a known, albeit 
difficult, problem. Experts are necessary to analyse the concrete situation, find out 
the relationships between causes and effects, and develop a response plan.

The  complex  context  deals  with  unpredictable  and  emergent  situations  where 
relationships between causes and effects are neither predefined nor easily analysed. 
Thus the best decision-making strategy consists in probing the system, obtaining 
feedback,  and  then  deciding  the  most  adequate  course  of  action.  The  chaotic 
 context  is  mainly  characterised  by  turbulence,  where  the  relationships  between 
causes  and  effects  may  be  unstable.  The  best  decision-making  strategy  in  this 
 context  recommends acting first and analysing the consequences later.

The simple and complicated contexts are associated with an ordered world and 
rational  decision  making.  On  the  contrary,  the  complex  and  chaotic  contexts 
 concern lack of order in the world. Of course, we may find out that many organisations 
 are  operating  mainly  on  one  (simple)  side  of  the  world.  The  governmental 
bureaucracy  would  be  exemplary  of  the  simple,  stable,  and  highly  standardised 
context.  But  most  organisations  actually  must  deal  with  both  worlds  in  order  to 
maximise their chances of survivability.

One  major  challenge  associated  with  shifting  operations  towards  the  unordered 
world  concerns  a  cognitive  function  called  situation  awareness  (SA).  It  may  be 
loosely defined as knowing what is going on in the operating environment (Endsley 
1995), dealing with a large amount of sensory cues to ultimately perceive what is 
important to the task at hand and how it may be effectively performed. SA is always 
associated with rich and dynamic environments such as piloting, air traffic control, 
and surgical operations. SA may be structured in three cognitive steps (Endsley 1995; 
Endsley 2003): (1) monitoring the contextual elements available in the environment, 
(2) diagnosing their meaning, and (3) projecting their near-future consequences.

SA  may  elucidate  the  cause-effect  relationships  established  by  the  unordered 
world  posited  by  the  Cynefin  framework.  SA  is  crucial  to  explore  a  complex 
 context since it serves to launch probes and perceive their effects in the  environment 
while building a conceptual map of the situation. SA also supports the operations 
in  a  chaotic  context,  allowing  proactively  building  patterns  of  reasonable  action 
based on reflection over anticipated actions.

We emphasise that SA is both an individual and a collaborative function since very 
often  multiple  operators  are  necessary  to  disentangle  asymmetric  information. 
Therefore, besides the three cognitive steps mentioned above, we should also  consider 
the interactions necessary to adjust individual and collective knowledge, share situation 
information, and anticipate the information needs of others (Shu and Futura 2005).

17  Development of a Mobile Situation Awareness Tool Supporting Disaster Recovery 

339

We seek to investigate how information technology may support collaborative 
SA.  And  we  have  a  particular  interest  in  one  specific  type  of  information 
 technology  –  mobile  devices  such  as  personal  digital  assistants,  mobile  phones, 
and tablet computers. Mobile technology has seen a rapid development in the last 
few years. Following Moore’s Law (Moore 1965), computing power is increasing 
rapidly, prices are decreasing, physical dimensions are becoming more adequate 
to mobile use, and its popularity is increasing. The development of networking and 
middleware technology supporting wireless communication, information synchronisation,
 and location awareness is also promoting the wide adoption of mobile 
technology  in  collaborative  settings  (Baloian,  Zurita,  Antunes,  and  Baytelman 
2007).

People now have the prospect to work and collaborate everywhere, wandering in 
office buildings, visiting clients, commuting from home to office, staying at home 
and,  of  course,  vacationing.  Furthermore,  by  shifting  the  operations  towards  the 
unordered  world,  we  are  also  finding  very  compelling  application  scenarios  in 
which mobile technology may be critical to develop SA:

•	

•	

•	

•	

In  hospital  environments,  supporting  a  constant  flow  of  information  about 
patients’  status  amid  health  care  personnel  (Muñoz,  Rodriguez,  Favela, 
Martinez-Garcia, and González 2003; Tentori and Favela 2008)
Beyond that, mediating health care information while being outside the  hospital 
premises, considering both health care personnel and patients (Sá, Carriço, and 
Antunes 2007)
Facilitating  fieldwork  and  remote  access  to  experts  operating  in  remote  areas 
(Antunes  and  André  2006;  MacEachren  2005;  Ochoa,  Pino,  Bravo,  Dujovne, 
and Neyem 2008), and
Supporting  rescue  efforts  and  emergency  management  in  disaster  areas  (Cai, 
MacEachren, Brewer, McNeese, Sharma, and Fuhrmann 2005; Kwan and Lee 
2005; Monares, Ochoa, Pino, Herskovic, and Neyam 2009).

This chapter reports exploratory research aiming to develop a SA tool on top of 
mobile technology. The specific application area is disaster recovery (DR) of business 
operations. In this context, the main goal of DR is preventing, mitigating, and 
containing the occurrence of major disruptions in critical business infrastructure, 
including networking, databases, and distributed services. The interest in DR has 
significantly increased since the occurrence of major business breakdowns in the 
United States of America caused by the terrorist attacks on the Twin Towers and 
hurricane Katrina (Hiles 2008).

The case reported in this chapter describes the initial trials of the SA tool in two 
organisations.  We  describe  the  preliminary  study,  requirements  elicitation,  and 
evaluation feedback obtained from the trials.

In the next section, we overview the related work. Section 3 describes the adopted 
research  methodology.  The  SA  model  and  tool  are  described  in  Sects.  4  and  5, 
respectively. The case study is presented in Sect. 6. The findings from the case study 
are  presented  in  Sect.  7.  Section  8  discusses  the  research  outcomes  and  presents 
some concluding remarks.

340

2 

 Related Work

P. Antunes et al.

A wide number of situations may lead to lack of order in business operations, some 
emerging  from  inside  the  organisation  (e.g.,  latent  problems,  failure  of  key 
resources, lack of flexibility, and the need to innovate) and many others emerging 
from the environment (e.g., market dynamics and natural hazards).

DR emerges as an organisational reaction to these situations. A simplified view 
of DR would consider the separation between disruptive and normal operations and 
the objective to move the operations from the disruptive towards the normal situation.
  DR  is  a  complex  process.  It  is  affected  by  surprise,  real-time  constraints, 
spatial extension, number of involved stakeholders, risk and uncertainty, limitations 
of human perception, and cascading events (Wybo and Latiers 2006).

Of course, technology has always been considered a silver bullet capable of helping 
to resolve most organisational problems (Grint and Woolgar 1997). It is, therefore,
 natural that significant research effort has been applied to developing technology 
support for DR. But the complexity associated with DR challenges information systems 
development (ISD), mostly because the analysis and design activities may not 
realistically cover all the possible events, contexts, and dynamic interactions that may 
occur (Perrow 1999; Turoff, Chumer, Van de Walle, and Yao 2004).

This challenge is patent when we consider the ISD of work processes. We define 
work  models  with  the  objectives  of  automating  recurrent  activities  and  improving 
coordination  and  efficiency.  But  the  support  for  unexpected  exceptions,  incomplete 
procedures, and dynamic changes is highly problematic (Mourão and Antunes 2007).
Markus,  Majchrzak,  and  Gasser  (2002)  defend  that  a  new  approach  to  ISD  is 
necessary to address the new class of systems falling outside what we previously 
referred to as the ordered world. This new class of systems is fundamentally characterised 
by being flexible, context-dependent, distributed, dynamically evolving, and 
collaborative.  High  reliability  organisations  (HRO),  such  as  aviation  and  nuclear 
operations, clearly emphasise these characteristics (Weick and Sutcliffe 2001).

Interestingly,  collaboration  is  regarded  as  a  fundamental  asset  in  HRO  (Baker, 
Day, and Salas 2006). In complex and chaotic situations, the complete reliance on 
anticipated  plans  is  quite  difficult  or  even  impossible  (Bruinsma  and  Hoog  2006). 
Therefore, involved participants must orchestrate their interventions while adapting 
to unfolding events. Their decisions may lack full insight about the situation context. 
Information shortage, as well as information overload, may lead to initial unbalanced 
responses (e.g., prioritising less urgent actions) and mutual adjustments. Other factors 
emphasising the role of collaboration in complex and chaotic situations include the 
spatial  extension  of  the  situation,  perception  and  knowledge  gaps  amongst  the 
involved actors, and poor overall SA and representation (Wybo and Latiers 2006).

SA is key to understanding the impact of collaboration on DR, mostly because 
SA  is  an  antecedent  of  sense  making,  collaboration,  and  collaborative  decisionmaking 
 (Weick  1995;  Weick  2001).  Businesses  have  a  strong  cognitive  and 
 heuristic character (Möller 2009) that must be supported with SA.

Based on a synthesis of 15 definitions found in the literature, Salmon, Stanton, 
Jenkins, Walker, Young, and Aujla (2007) define individual SA as the continuous 

17  Development of a Mobile Situation Awareness Tool Supporting Disaster Recovery 

341

extraction of environmental information and integration with previous knowledge 
to  form  a  coherent  mental  picture  and  using  that  picture  to  direct  and  anticipate 
future events.

Since the late 1980s, a number of SA models have been proposed. The Ensdley’s 
three-level model is the one that has received the utmost attention (1995). In level 1, 
training  and  experience  directs  attention  to  critical  elements  in  the  environment. 
Level 2 integrates elements that aid understanding the meaning of critical elements. 
And level 3 considers understanding the possible future scenarios.

Bedny and Meister (1999) rooted their model on activity theory and offer a more 
dynamic  perspective  over  SA,  considering  a  continuous  loop  in  which  SA  directs 
interactions with the world, which in turn modifies SA. This continuous loop is motivated 
by the disparity between one’s goals and the current perceived situation. It comprises 
 three  stages:  orientational  (development  of  an  internal  conceptual  model), 
executive (moving towards a desired goal via decision making and action execution), 
and evaluative (assessing the feedback information and influencing the other stages).
Smith and Hancock (1995) proposed an ecological view of SA. The theory is 
that SA is neither resident in individuals nor in the world but rather in the interactions 
that are motivated by one’s schemata; and that the outcome of that interaction 
will modify the existing schemata, which in turn directs further exploration.

All of the above models consider individual SA. The notion of team SA is more 
recent and currently lacks a universally accepted model (Salmon et al. 2007). Some 
literature on team cognition has been exploring the idea that team effectiveness may 
not only depend on an overlap of individual cognitions but also the construction of 
team cognition (Hayes 2006). Team SA combines individual SA (necessary to conduct 
individual tasks) with shared understanding of the situation amongst team members 
 (Endsley  and  Jones  2001).  Shu  and  Futura  (2005)  posit  that  team  SA  is 
collaborative  and  partially  shared  and  partially  distributed.  Additionally,  Salas, 
Prince,  Baker,  and  Shrestha  (1995)  and  Fiori,  Salas,  Cuevas,  and  Bowers  (2003) 
highlight the importance of team processes as  contributors to team SA, compensating 
the limitations of individual SA with  information exchange and communication.

Stanton, Stewart, Harris, Houghton, Baber, McMaster, Salmon, Hoyle, Walker, 
Young, Linsell, Dymott, and Green (2006) suggest that in complex contexts, individuals 
rarely  perform entirely independent activities. They are often coupled and 
tend to be coordinated. This focus on coordination changes the unit of analysis and 
affords  analysing  interactions  at  many  different  organisational  levels.  Thus,  collaborative 
SA combines individual SA, distributed SA, shared SA, and team SA. 
This   multidimensional  view  posits  many  challenges  to  SA  research  and 
development.

3 

 Research Methodology

This work assumes an engineering viewpoint aiming to improve collaborative SA 
through technology development. But the emphasis on cognition and collaboration 
mandate a user-centred approach to technology development. Therefore, in order to 

342

P. Antunes et al.

bring  together  these  two  different  perspectives,  we  have  adopted  a  research 
 methodology combining exploratory with theory-based research.

On the one hand, the exploratory perspective seeks to obtain qualitative insights 
about  the  construction  and  maintenance  of  SA.  This  requires  a  strong  focus  on 
understanding the users’ behaviour within a specific working context, which in our 
case  is  maintaining  business  operations  after  major  breakdowns  in  technological 
infrastructure. The case study method (Gerring 2007) was selected to gather contextualised 
 information  from  people  highly  experienced  with  DR  of  business 
operations.

On the other hand, our focus on technology development also mandates a positivistic 
approach to supporting SA in the selected application context and using a 
particular  technological  solution.  Therefore,  the  theory-based  approach  (Briggs 
2006) was adopted to ground the technology development on a sound engineering 
basis.

Consequently, the case study discussed in this chapter is also directed towards 
validating  the  SA  model  and  tool  we  have  been  developing.  As  Briggs  (2006) 
points out, a good theory can drive nonintuitive design choices that improve technology 
outcomes.

Because of this twofold approach, the adopted case study research is expected 
to  provide  hybrid  outcomes.  Being  theory-driven,  the  outcomes  are  less  open  to 
surprise and the contextual information is less varied and insightful than usual. By 
also being exploratory, a rigorous validation of the proposed SA model is also less 
important  than  usual.  Overall,  the  adopted  research  methodology  seeks  an  early 
validation of the theoretical and practical constructs put forward regarding the use 
of mobile technology in support of collaborative SA. The defined research plan has 
the following major steps:

 1.  Develop SA theory and model
 2.  Implement the SA theory and model in a computational tool
 3.  Study the acceptance of theory and tool by practitioners
 4.  Go back to 1 until practitioners are satisfied

4 

 Situation Awareness (SA) Model

Our SA model proposes a representation of the key information elements involved 
in the DR process. Inspired by the “Swiss cheese” model (Reason 1997; Reason 
2008) to organise SA information elements, the model posits that for an accident to 
occur an alignment of holes in different defence layers must occur.

We may characterise these defence layers according to a continuum of organisational 
 strategies  ranging  from  the  sharp  end  to  the  blunt  end  (Hollnagel  2004; 
Woods and Hollnagel 2006). At the sharp end, we have operators and practitioners, 
the first-line of defence we usually find in a complex system. Towards the blunt end 
we may find line managers, administrative controls and regulations, designers and 

17  Development of a Mobile Situation Awareness Tool Supporting Disaster Recovery 

343

engineers, policy makers, and a myriad of other organisational factors and agents 
that indirectly contribute to the defence system.

Although the actual events that may lead to accidents tend to be highly intertwined 
 and  interdependent,  the  sharp  end-blunt  end  view  offers  a  simple  way  to 
conceptualise complex accident trajectories in a simple and linear way. We defend 
that this type of strategy may as well be adopted to construct SA. The main reasoning 
is the actors involved in DR may consider different SA layers in a way very 
similar  to  the  one  adopted  by  the  “Swiss  cheese”  model.  More  specifically,  our 
model  defines  a  layered  arrangement  of  the  SA  elements  involved  in  the  DR 
 process, aligned from the sharp end to the blunt end.

Furthermore, we also adopt the perspective that information display is fundamental 
 to  support  information  analysis.  We  find  in  the  literature  many  different 
forms to display qualitative data (e.g., concept clusters, empirical clusters, checklist 
matrixes, timelines, event listings, causal networks, and cognitive maps (Miles and 
Huberman 1994)).

One  way  to  display  awareness  information  is  using  situation  matrixes  (SM), 
allowing establishing correlations between several elements aligned according to 
dimensions  of  the  situation.  One  typical  SM  is  the  goals/actions  matrix,  which 
 correlates the defined goals with the actions perceived as necessary to accomplish 
those  goals.  Other  examples  of  SM  may  include  time/events,  events/conditions, 
problems/solutions,  actions/actors,  and  actors/resources.  Observe  three  SM 
 examples in Fig. 1.

We hypothesise that the combination of sharp end-blunt end layers with an 
SM offers the structure necessary to build and visualise SA. On the one hand, 
the   layered  matrixes  provide  a  strategic  view  of  the  situation  based  on  the 
dimensions perceived as necessary to understand the situation and act upon it. 
On the other hand, the correlations within each matrix provide a tactical view 
of the situation in its multiple dimensions. The proposed SA model is  illustrated 
in Fig. 2.

Of course this SA model should be understood in a dynamic way. For a given 
application domain, an initial set of dimensions and SM may be available to support 
initial sense making, decision-making, planning, and action. But, as the situation 
evolves, new dimensions and SM may emerge in real time, while others may lose 
importance  and  disappear.  We  finally  note  the  proposed  SA  model  should  be 
 collaboratively managed. More details about this functionality will be presented in 
the next section.

5 

 Situation Awareness (SA) Tool

According  to  the  proposed  SA  model,  SA  is  structured  with  a  collection  of  SM 
aligning with the various dimensions of the situation, including events, conditions, 
goals,  resources,  and  actions.  Let  us  start  by  describing  the  SA  model  in  more 
detail.

344

P. Antunes et al.

Fig. 1  Examples of situation matrixes. The correlations are represented with symbols

Fig. 2  Situation awareness model

The SM have two dimensions. Each dimension includes several entities that may 
be relevant to assess the situation. For instance, the goals dimension may include 
entities like mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery. We note that, in this 
case, there is a sequence relationship between the entities that reproduces typical 

17  Development of a Mobile Situation Awareness Tool Supporting Disaster Recovery 

345

emergency handling stages (Harrald and Stoddard 1998). Another dimension may 
consider the actors involved in the DR process, a case where there may be no definite 
type of relationship between the entities. Therefore, the proposed tool should 
not  define  a  priori  the  type  of  relationships  between  the  elements  defined  for  a 
dimension.

Regarding the SM correlations, their purpose is to express the strength of the 
relationships that contribute to assess the problem and delineate the solution. For 
instance, considering a SM with goals and actions, the correlations may express 
how much some actions contribute to some goals. The correlations should follow 
an  ordinal  scale  (e.g.,  none,  some,  low,  and  high).  But  again  the  semantics 
depends  on  the  specific  application  domain.  What  is  fundamental  is  that  the 
 correlations should be expressed through different visual symbols (and attributes 
like  colour)  and  convey  an  overall  perspective  of  the  several  relationships 
 established in an SM.

Of  course,  several  SM  are  necessary  to  perceive  the  whole  situation  context. 
These SM are organised in a tree, a structure that is adequate to model the various 
dimensions of the situation (including time). Again, the relationships amongst the 
several SM are application dependent. In some cases, they may follow the sharp 
end-blunt  end  relationship  previously  discussed.  In  other  cases  they  may  closely 
follow chains of events, different levels of perception, projections of future events, 
or  even  a  combination  of  all  the  above.  Therefore,  the  implementation  must  be 
independent from any specific application domain but at the same time be flexible 
enough to accommodate the various configurations previously mentioned.

The developed tool supports the manipulation of SM using pen-based gestures. 
Interaction with the SM occurs in real time and using a small number of pen-based 
gestures.  The  gesture  shown  in  Fig.  3a  creates  a  new  SM.  The  list  of  available 
dimensions  is  displayed  when  pointing  towards  the  right  side  of  the  display,  as 
shown in Fig. 3b. As illustrated in Fig. 3c, the selected dimensions may be dragged 
to  the  SM  using  the  pen.  Note  again  that  currently  the  SM  are  bi-dimensional. 
Figure 4 shows a SM with two dimensions, actors, and actions.

Fig. 3  Creating situation matrixes – (a) creation; (b) displaying dimensions; and (c) assigning 
dimensions

346

P. Antunes et al.

Fig.  4  Populating  situation  matrixes  –  (a)  creating  dimensional  entities;  (b)  and  (c)  naming 
dimensional entities; and (d) defining correlations in the SM

After  assigning  dimensions  to  a  SM,  the  users  may  start  populating  it  with 
dimensional entities. One example is defining several actions and actors. This is 
accomplished by inserting lines and columns in the SM. To create lines and columns 
the user has to double click on the label (see Figs. 4a and 4c). After this, the 
user  should  name  the  dimensional  element.  Figure  4b  shows  how  the  “  actors” 
dimension is populated with the “Rodriguez” element.

Figure 4d illustrates how correlations are established. The tool allows selecting correlations 
from a list of predefined values. We have currently implemented four correlation 
values: (a) empty cell, no importance given; (b) small dot, small importance; (c) 
medium dot, relative importance; and (d) big circle, high importance. Clicking on a 
cell will cause a pop-up menu to be displayed with the available options.

Since users may be interested in viewing different parts of the SM according to 
their context of action, the system allows hiding rows or columns by clicking on the 
respective label. Hidden rows and columns are displayed with thick lines. To show 
again a hidden column or row, the user just has to double click on the thick line.

Still  regarding  SM  visualisation,  the  tool  supports  left-right  and  up-down 
 scrolling, combined with zoom-in and zoom-out. These interactions are illustrated 
in Fig. 5. Note that, since display space in mobile devices is rather scarce, the above 
navigational capabilities rely on gestures instead of typical visual elements such as 
scrollbars.

We also note the mobile devices we have been using are capable of displaying 
one  single  SM,  and  with  limitations  since  only  a  small  number  of  dimensional 
 elements  may  effectively  be  displayed  without  scrolling.  The  implemented 
 interaction mechanism for navigating multiple SM is the hierarchical menu.

The SA tool adopts a fully replicated information architecture and supports concurrent 
updates of the SA model. Every mobile device maintains a replica of the SM 
tree and synchronises the updates whenever the network connection may be established.
 The users can thus modify or update the SM tree at every time, independently 
of the other users and the network connectivity. The adopted concurrency management 
approach has been coined “open floor” by the computer-supported collaborative 
 work  (CSCW)  community  (Lauwers  and  Lantz  1990;  Reinhard,  Schweitzer, 
Völksen, and Weber 1994). This approach does not define any rules governing the 

17  Development of a Mobile Situation Awareness Tool Supporting Disaster Recovery 

347

Fig. 5  SM navigation – (a) zoom-in and zoom-out; and (b) left-right and up-down scrolling

concurrent updates to shared information, delegating instead to the users any necessary 
social  arrangements, which should be constructed during training.

The functionality described above was implemented on top of an existing mobile 
collaborative platform (Baloian et al. 2007). This platform has already been used to 
develop several mobile applications (e.g., Zurita, Antunes, Baloian, and Baytelman 
2007; Zurita and Baloian 2005). The platform relies on ad-hoc networking to maintain 
collaboration under situations where structured networking infrastructure may 
fail, a characteristic that is particularly adequate to the DR context discussed in this 
chapter.  More  technical  details  about  the  mobile  collaborative  platform  may  be 
found in Baloian and Zurita (2009) and Zurita, Baloian, and Baytelman (2008).

6 

 Case Study

6.1 

 Definition

The case study concerns the support to DR in two information technology departments 
operating in two different organisations. These two departments are considered 
homogeneous for the purposes of the study.

The main responsibilities assigned to the selected departments include: installing 
and maintaining the networking and computing infrastructure, including network 
appliances, computers, printers, servers, backup units, etc; controlling the security 
threats to this infrastructure; and ensuring business continuity.

A large amount of the work accomplished by these departments concerns highly 
standardised activities such as reconfiguring routers, updating virus-scanning utilities,
 monitoring service levels, and responding to requests from single users and 
other departments. Our focus is not on these standardised activities but instead on 
the nonroutine activities necessary to maintain business continuity under abnormal 
conditions. These nonroutine activities are not solicited very often, but are highly 
pressed by time constraints and cognitive workload. This includes handling server 

348

P. Antunes et al.

failures, critical service failures (mail, Web proxy, domain naming), and  large-scale 
networking failures, not to forget recovering from accidents such as fires, floods, 
and earthquakes.

Despite the existence of highly trained personnel, standardised business  continuity 
plans  and  detailed  procedures  to  address  some  disruptive  situations,  three  main 
issues may strongly condition their effectiveness. Firstly, we should consider that 
standard procedures typically do not accommodate the whole variety of contextual 
and  contingent  factors  affecting  DR  operations.  Therefore,  established  plans  and 
procedures serve more as information resources than actual operational processes 
(Suchman  1987).  They  may  be  an  important  asset  but  are  not  as  critical  as  other 
assets,  in  particular  highly  knowledgeable  human  resources.  Secondly,  many  DR 
operations require tacit knowledge, experience, decision making, and collaboration 
when assessing the situation and developing creative solutions and temporary workarounds.
  And  thirdly,  we  should  also  consider  the  operation  of  large  information 
technology  infrastructure  is  typically  distributed  in  two  dimensions:  spatially, 
regarding the various offices, buildings, cable networks, and technical spaces; and 
cognitively, since knowledge and skills tend to be widely distributed. This distributed 
nature emphasises the potential demand for collaborative SA.

What  mobile  technology  may  bring  to  these  scenarios  is  empowering  team 
members  with  collaborative  SA.  The  envisioned  functionality  includes  group 
 communication and information sharing, synchronisation, and visualisation. More 
specifically, considering the defined SA model, the proposed functionality includes 
sharing the SM, allowing team members to collaboratively create, view and update 
SM, and their correlations in real time and on the move.

Based on the above premises, the main objective of the case study is exploring how 
the  selected  information  technology  departments  may  utilise  mobile   technology  to 
recover from abnormal infrastructural conditions. The main factor of interest is SA.

6.2 

 Preliminary Study

To gain insights about DR of business operations, to verify our assertions, and to 
consolidate  our  goals,  we  conducted  a  preliminary  study  with  the  participating 
teams. The concrete objectives defined for the preliminary study were to (1) identify 
the types of incidents that emerge in these organisations and (2) identify the 
practices developed by the teams to overcome them. The participating teams were 
composed of one coordinator, two senior technicians, and two junior technicians; 
and one coordinator, one senior technician, and one junior technician.

Semistructured  group  interviews  were  utilised.  The  following  open  questions 

guided the interviews:

•	
•	
•	
•	

Which situations may be described as incidents/accidents?
Which preventive and diagnostic practices are currently being used?
Which formal and informal procedures have been adopted?
Which communication mechanisms are used during DR?

17  Development of a Mobile Situation Awareness Tool Supporting Disaster Recovery 

349

•	
•	

Do you use any performance metrics?
Do you use any plans with DR procedures?

The  outcomes  from  the  semistructured  interviews  indicate  that  the  most  critical 
incidents are related to server failures, mostly due to disk failures, and connectivity 
losses in specific network segments compromising a wide variety of services. 
A preoccupation with more untypical problems was also reported, “[…] like a flood 
in the basement where some of the equipment is located […]”

As pointed out by both teams, the existing preventative practices rely heavily on 
monitoring  active  network  components  through  control  panels  where  alerts  are 
displayed and emailed to the technicians. Many critical situations require the team 
members find out where the failing components are physically located. And they 
have to go to the physical locations to perceive the actual situation context. The 
diagnosis and recovery practices rely heavily on the field experience of each team 
member, which seems to be highly specialised, e.g., there are Windows, Mac, and 
LINUX specialists. The teams rely on quick informal meetings, phone calls, and 
chat-tools to share knowledge, coordinate activities, and make decisions. Besides 
performing maintenance actions, the teams also rely on service-level agreements 
with suppliers and a spare stock to overcome problems.

One  key  concern  that  emerged  from  the  semistructured  interviews  was  that 
teams find it important to document what has been done to diagnose and recover 
from incidents and accidents. This information was considered essential to support 
organisational learning, especially because human resources tend to rotate a lot in 
these units and thus past experience is often lost.

Although  both  teams  use  trouble  ticket  software  in  their  routine  maintenance 
operations, they also realised that trouble tickets are almost irrelevant during nonroutine 
situations. Trouble tickets are sometimes used for incident opening and only 
occasionally for postmortem annotations to close incidents resulting in no significant 
impact on planning future responses.

Interestingly, one of the mentioned reasons for not using trouble tickets more 
often is they are not accessible where the incidents actually occur. The networking 
and computing infrastructure are distributed through several building and offices, 
while the trouble tickets are only available in desktop computers that may be inaccessible 
in these sites.

From the interviews we realised: (1) the selected application scenario concerns 
a mobile collaborative situation perceived as critical to the teams; and (2) the tasks 
perceived  as  important  by  the  teams  are  related  to  decision-making  support  and 
organisational memory.

6.3 

 Requirements Elicitation

Having established the relevance of the selected application scenario, we proceeded 
with a more thorough analysis of the application requirements and their alignment 

350

P. Antunes et al.

with the developed SA theory and tool. We adopted the following method. First, we 
compiled a list of requirements from the related literature. We then requested the 
team  members  to  analyse  and  prioritise  the  requirements  according  to  their  work 
context.  And  we  finally  established  the  list  of  requirements  according  to  the  perceived 
priorities.

The requirements compiled from the research literature consider four categories: 
collaborative technology (Steves, Morse, Gutwin, and Greenberg 2001), knowledge 
management  (Vizcaíno,  Martinez,  Aranda,  and  Piattini  2005),  team  performance 
(Baeza-Yates and Pino 2006), and SA (Salmon, Stanton, Walker, and Green 2005). 
The  first  category  addresses  the  main  technological  features  necessary  to  provide 
collaboration support. The knowledge management category was selected because it 
has  already  been  pointed  out  as  important  in  the  preliminary  study.  Team  performance 
 concerns  the  efficiency  of  technology  support.  And  the  last  category  was 
selected to specifically address the theoretical concerns associated with SA (Endsley 
1995; Endsley 2003).

In Table 1 represents the compiled requirements list that was delivered to the 
participants for prioritisation. The participants (seven persons) were requested to 
individually  rate  the  selected  requirements  with  relevance  to  the  teams’  work 
 context. The ratings scale was: 1 – Not perceived as important; 2 – Less important; 
3 – Important; and 4 – Very important. The answers were received by email. The 
consolidated scores are shown in Table 2.

We defined a threshold of 3.0 for cutting off the less important requirements. As 
we may observe, the members rated eight requirements above the threshold (important 
 or  very  important)  and  seven  requirements  below  the  threshold  (less  or  not 
important). Interestingly, the four requirements categories are all evenly represented, 
although we find a slight advantage given to collaboration support and SA.

The  obtained  results  clearly  emphasise  the  importance  given  by  the  teams  to 
immediacy  of  action  (requirements  1,  4,  and  13)  and  responsiveness  to  events 
(requirements 3, 5, 6, 8, 13). In our view, these results express the importance of 

Table 1  Requirements list
#
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
10
11
12
13
14
15

Requirement
Communication support through shared artefacts
Transition between individual and team work
Facilitate situation monitoring
Minimum overhead
Mobility support
Help understanding situation context
Help perceiving who is involved
Assist situation size-up
Assist overall situation representation
Knowledge externalisation
Knowledge transfer
Document incident handling
Improve diagnosis time
Improve recovery time
Increase number of incidents simultaneously attended

Area
Collaboration support

Situation awareness

Knowledge management

Performance

17  Development of a Mobile Situation Awareness Tool Supporting Disaster Recovery 

351

2

1

2
3

1

Table 2  Requirements priorities
#
 4
 5
 6
13
12
 8
 3
10
11
15
 1
 9
14
 7
 2

2
2
2
4
5

1

4
6
5
5
4
3
2
1
1
2
1

3
1
2
2
2
2
5
6
4
2
5
5
5
5
3
2

AVG
3.86
3.71
3.71
3.67
3.33
3.29
3.14
2.86
2.86
2.86
2.71
2.71
2.71
2.43
2.29

STDEV
0.38
0.49
0.49
0.52
0.82
0.49
0.38
0.69
0.90
0.90
0.49
0.49
0.49
0.53
0.49

tight  coupling  (Perrow  1999)  and  actually  elucidate  how  it  may  be  obtained. 
Incident  documentation  was  already  mentioned  in  the  semistructured  interviews 
and emerged again as important (requirement 12).

And finally, it should also be emphasised that the teams validated the alignment 
with  our  research  and  their  interests,  especially  concerning  SA  and  mobility. 
Mobility was the second most rated requirement, while understanding the situation 
context  appears  in  third  place  (although  the  other  elements  of  SA  were  ranked 
lower).  Overall,  with  this  inquiry  we  validated  our  main  research  objectives  and 
obtained important information necessary to adapt the tool to the target application 
domain and users.

6.4 

 Theory/Tool Evaluation

The evaluation of collaborative technology raises many methodological concerns 
that have received attention from researchers in the CSCW community (Herskovic, 
Pino, Ochoa, and Antunes 2007). Different evaluation techniques may be adopted 
according to emphasis on technical (e.g., interoperability), human (e.g., usability), 
and organisational (e.g., effects on task performance) issues (Gauducheau, Soulier, 
and Lewkowicz 2005; Vyhmeister, Mondelo, and Novella. 2006).

An evaluation strategy well adapted to case studies and complex collaborative 
settings  uses  field  methods  in  actual  working  environments  (Hughes,  King, 
Rodden, and Andersen 1994). Although this approach allows capturing very rich 
data, it is also difficult to accomplish for various reasons: requirement of a large 
amount  of  time   investment,  necessity  of  using  a  fully  working  prototype, 
requirements of high commitment from the organisation, and access to actual or 
simulated disaster situations.

352

P. Antunes et al.

Inspection  techniques  (Nielsen  1994)  may  also  be  employed  in  case  studies. 
Inspection techniques rely on domain experts to analyse the technology and expose 
possible problems and drawbacks of technology use. Inspection techniques are less 
costly  than  field  methods  and  may  be  used  earlier  and  more  frequently  in  the 
 development cycle.

Steves  et  al.  (2001)  defend  that  inspection  techniques  should  be  employed  in 
early  development  stages  when  prototypes  are  still  immature  and  field  methods 
should be employed afterwards. Based on this perspective, our evaluation approach 
was based on inspection.

The evaluation process evolved in the following way. First, we requested the 
team  leaders  to  develop  a  common  use-scenario.  Use-scenarios  have  been 
employed in conjunction with inspection techniques to bring more context to the 
evaluation task (Carroll 2000; Haynes, Purao, and Skattebo 2004). The developed 
scenario is shown in Fig. 6 (left).

We then conducted workshops with the teams, requesting them to inspect the 
tool  in  the  context  of  the  predefined  scenario.  Three  interconnected  devices 
 purposely configured for the specific evaluation teams were supplied. The teams 
were given sufficient time to experience the tool and discuss its implications to their 
work. They were able to create SM, create dimensions and dimensional  entities, 
define correlations, and navigate through the various SM, observing how the various 
devices use the ad-hoc network to synchronise information. The teams also had 
the opportunity to experience the collaborative nature of the tool, supporting concurrent 
updates to correlations. In Fig. 6 (right), we show the tool running on one 
mobile device during the workshops.

From these workshops we obtained qualitative data consisting of comments and 
suggestions. They revealed that when a nonroutine situation occurs, the personal 

Fig. 6  Inspection: (left) scenario, and (right) tool

17  Development of a Mobile Situation Awareness Tool Supporting Disaster Recovery 

353

experience  of  the  involved  operators  strongly  influences  team  SA.  For  example, 
when highly experienced operators happen to be available during the problematic 
situation,  it  was  easier  to  collectively  understand  the  causes,  implications,  and 
 consequences  of  the  event.  The  tool  was  perceived  as  the  most  relevant  one  to 
establish collaborative SA when the less-experienced operators were confronted with 
the situation. Knowledge transfer and incident  documentation were considered very 
important to the team leaders, while knowledge representation and externalisation 
was revealed as most important to junior technicians.

The workshop participants also analysed the SA model and its impact on the 
DR  strategy.  From  the  discussions  that  took  place  in  both  workshops,  the 
highly  informal  and  unstructured  work  practices  were  obvious  to  both  teams. 
The courses of action varied according to the involved actors and some discussions 
 took  place  on  the  more  efficient  ways  to  address  various  occurrences. 
The   participants  drafted  several  SM  in  paper  prototypes  expressing  the  best 
ways to address some incidents. Figure 7 shows some examples of these paper 
prototypes.

This way the teams defined the most adequate set of SM to their work context. 
The dimensions they considered more relevant were: equipment, actors, locations, 
actions and steps. These dimensions would then be correlated in the following SM:

•	

•	
•	

•	

Actions-Steps,  detailing  operational  activities  (e.g.,  check  router  X,  reboot 
switch Y),
Actors-Steps, defining responsibilities,
Equipment-Actors, expressing who is responsible for the equipment (e.g., who 
may activate a supplier warranty and who has the skills necessary to inspect a 
LINUX server), and
Equipment-Locations, allowing junior team members to find out the equipment 
locations (e.g., main gateway of building C6 is located in room 6.3.0.1).

Fig. 7  Situation matrixes drafted during the workshops

354

P. Antunes et al.

Of course, the team members discussed a large set of usability problems they 
found  in  the  tool.  They  recommended  the  SM  should  be  easily  reused  across 
 multiple DR processes. They also considered having an overview of the whole 
 situation  important,  displaying  all  of  the  SM  and  existing  correlations,  something 
that is quite difficult to accomplish considering the small display size of 
the used devices.

A better support for navigating the SM was highly recommended. The participants 
also regarded keeping awareness information up-to-date a major challenge, emphasising 
the  potential  problems  of  either  having  “aged”  information  or,  alternatively,  having 
overhead introducing current information in the tool. The participants suggested  asking 
for  the  validity  of  correlations.  As  correlations  age,  the  users  could  be  prompted  to 
report their validity; they also suggested using visualisation techniques to express the 
ageing of correlations. And finally, both teams pointed the proposed model was aligned 
with the requirements they considered relevant for DR of  business operations.

6.5 

 Results from the Case Study

It was possible to confirm with the case study that SA is influential whenever the 
teams  must  coordinate  nonstandard  activities  since  activities  are  distributed 
throughout the physical space and expertise is evenly distributed. SA seems to be 
more important to inexperienced workers.

By the end of the workshops, both teams reported the evaluation sessions revealed 
something  they  were  only  suspicious  about:  the  individuals’  experience  strongly 
conditions the team’s performance. The issue was not completely new to them, and 
they  were  trying  to  address  it  by  compiling  contingency  plans  externalising  and 
optimising such knowledge. But due to lack of time, they have given low priority to 
this goal and so the available list of contingency plans is short in one organisation 
and nonexistent in the other. Both teams perceived the SA tool as an opportunity to 
define contingency plans. Thus, one interesting outcome of this case study was that, 
unlike what we were expecting, the SA tool seemed more useful to indirectly document 
DR strategies rather than supporting direct human interventions.

The  teams’  appropriation  of  the  SA  tool  was  patent.  The  workshop  sessions 
served to define a template for contingency plans that could be used in the future. 
The  template  uses  the  proposed  SA  model  and  organises  the  overall  response 
according to a set of SM and dimensions, including equipment, actors, locations, 
actions, and activities.

Finally,  regarding  the  adopted  research  approach,  some  considerations  were  also 
worth noting. The first interview revealed crucial to establish a common ground for a 
richer  discussion  in  the  requirements  and  evaluation  phases.  The  prototype  was 
 fundamental to develop a pragmatic view of the tools’ advantages (e.g., mobility) and 
drawbacks (e.g., interaction problems and small display size), thus facilitating a  realistic 
assessment of its utility. Overall, the evaluation process was adequate to an exploratory 
research focused on a specific theory and model based on expert evaluation.

17  Development of a Mobile Situation Awareness Tool Supporting Disaster Recovery 

355

7 

 Discussion

The main organisational problems dealing with the unordered world seemed to be 
rooted in a lack of collective awareness about the ongoing situation, plus communication 
 and  information  management  problems  (Kanno  and  Furuta  2006; 
McManus, Seville, Brunsdon, and Vargo 2007; Milis and Walle 2007). Therefore, 
we concluded increasing the level of collaborative SA as a fundamental requirement 
for DR. The teams that participated in our research also supported this view.
To  accomplish  this  endeavour,  we  articulated  the  main  information  elements 
necessary for collaborative SA with a model. The model, which was inspired by 
the  “Swiss-cheese”  model  (Reason  1997,  2008),  organises  the  information  elements 
necessary for collaborative SA in a strategic view of the situation ranging 
from the sharp end to the blunt end. Each view brings together two dimensions of 
the  sproblem and several correlations between the defined dimensional elements. 
The  model  may  be  constantly  updated  in  runtime  thus  supporting  information 
 sharing, coordination, and collaboration.

Events, awareness and actions are often difficult to disentangle in the unordered 
world.  The  traditional  linear  models  (e.g.,  Domino  model  (Heinrich  1931))  of 
 accident trajectory suggest there is some intrinsic order over time, from event to 
awareness and action, but the reality is that chaos is what mostly defines disastrous 
conditions  (Kelly  1998).  The  typical  approaches  to  DR  rooted  on  linear  models 
have been criticised for only distinguishing the major stages in accident trajectories 
(Kelly 1998), forgetting many nonlinear relationships between the various elements 
that make up the accident context. Overall, the linear models seem to provide few 
insights about the actual unfolding of a disaster.

Others suggest that DR should instead focus on systemic views of the situation 
(Hollnagel  and  Woods  2005a,  b).  These  new  approaches  emphasise  contextual, 
situational, contingencial, and interactive relationships amongst multiple information 
elements. The model and tool we developed adopt the latter perspective. The 
main objective is maintaining collaboratively and in real time the multiple interdependencies 
 of  events,  actions,  actors,  contexts,  plans  and  many  other  factors 
involved in DR.

The model and tool are generic offering a common strategy to build a shared 
view of the situation using SM, situation dimensions, dimensional elements, and 
correlations. Predefined SM, situation dimensions, and dimensional elements may 
be tailored to suit specific domains and facilitate the first approach to the situation. 
But depending on the involved organisation and emergent situation, this information 
structure may have to be redefined in run time. Therefore, a significant effort 
has  been  made  in  order  to  accommodate  dynamic  changes  in  the  information 
structure.

Another characteristic of the proposed model and tool is the support to concurrent 
 changes  in  the  information  structure.  This  approach  is  quite  distinct  from 
 others emphasising the chain of command and control. The hierarchical control has 
been  criticised  for  favouring  a  concentration  of  decision  making  and  putting  too 

356

P. Antunes et al.

much emphasis on vertical communication (Drabek and McEntire 2003). Instead, 
several disaster sociologists emphasise that critical responses should be organised 
with decentralised structures and cooperation between actors (Drabek and McEntire 
2003). The proposed model and tool also adopt this latter view.

The preliminary results from the case study indicate that the model and tool are 
influential whenever the teams have to coordinate nonstandard activities, especially 
when less-experienced workers are involved in the process. The results also indicate 
the importance of constructing and maintaining organisational memory, which 
may  be  supported  with  the  proposed  tool.  Nevertheless,  more  qualitative  and 
 quantitative experiments are necessary to assess the model/tool contributions. Our 
research work is currently focused on: (1) developing metrics adequate for collaborative 
SA, which may be employed to quantitatively assess the tool’s impact on 
team performance; and (2) developing experimental scenarios that could be used in 
laboratory  to  qualitatively  assess  the  teams’  construction  and  use  of  the  SM  in 
disaster situations.

8 

 Conclusions

The  scenarios  characterised  by  complexity,  hard-to-define  causal  relationships, 
dynamic changes, and lack of information necessitate important changes in organisational 
decision making. Instead of predefined and structured approaches, we find 
strategies based on exploring, probing, and acting while trying to understand the 
situation.

The model and tool discussed in this chapter address these new strategies. The 
focus  is  on  the  support  to  the  collaborative  construction  of  SA  by  the  involved 
users, allowing them to dynamically and concurrently manipulate the information 
structure.  Furthermore,  the  proposed  model  organises  the  information  structure 
according  to  multiple  types  of  relationships,  such  as  problems-solutions,  causeseffects 
and actions-actors. This structure aims at facilitating information interaction 
and visualisation.

These conclusions are based on feedback from teams with high expertise in DR 
of business operations drawing from evaluations of our model and tool. Because 
inspection  was  the  adopted  evaluation  method,  further  research  should  be  conducted 
to validate the model and tool in real disaster situations. Nevertheless, the 
evaluation  data  already  obtained  indicate  that  the  model  and  tool  are  capable  of 
responding to the most significant problems faced by the teams. The participants’ 
feedback  also  points  towards  the  need  to  improve  information  visualisation  and 
interaction in mobile devices.

Acknowledgements  This  work  was  partially  funded  by  Fondecyt  (project  1085010)  and  the 
Portuguese  Foundation  for  Science  and  Technology  (projects  PTDC/EIA  67589/2006  and 
102875/2008).

17  Development of a Mobile Situation Awareness Tool Supporting Disaster Recovery 

357

References

Antunes,  P.  and  P.  André,  “A  Conceptual  Framework  for  the  Design  of  Geo-Collaborative 

Systems,” Group Decision and Negotiation, 15, 2006, 273–295.

Baeza-Yates,  R.  and  J.  Pino,  “Towards  Formal  Evaluation  of  Collaborative  Work  and  Its 

Application to Information Retrieval,” Information Research, 11, 4, 2006, 271.

Baker,  D.,  R.  Day  and  E.  Salas,  “Teamwork  as  an  Essential  Component  of  High-Reliability 

Organizations,” Health Services Research, 41, 4, 2006, 1576–1598.

Baloian,  N.  and  G.  Zurita,  “Mc-Supporter:  Flexible  Mobile  Computing  Supporting  Learning 
Though  Social  Interaction,”  Journal  of  Universal  Computer  Science,  15,  9,  2009, 
1833–1851.

Baloian,  N.,  G.  Zurita,  P.  Antunes  and  F.  Baytelman,  “A  Flexible,  Lightweight  Middleware 
Supporting  the  Development  of  Distributed  Applications  across  Platforms,”  The  11th 
International Conference on CSCW in Design, Melbourne, 2007.

Bedny, G. and D. Meister, “Theory of Activity and Situation Awareness,” International Journal of 

Cognitive Ergonomics, 3, 1, 1999, 63–72.

Briggs, R., “On Theory-Driven Design and Deployment of Collaboration Systems,” International 

Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 64, 7, 2006, 573–582.

Bruinsma,  G.  and  R.  Hoog,  Third  International  Conference  on  Information  Systems  for  Crisis 

Response and Management (ISCRAM), Newark, 2006, 53–65.

Cai, G., A. MacEachren, I. Brewer, M. McNeese, R. Sharma and S. Fuhrmann, “Map-Mediated 
Geocollaborative  Crisis  Management,”  Intelligence  and  Security  Informatics,  Heidelberg: 
Springer, 2005, 429–435.

Carroll, J., Making Use: Scenario-Based Design of Human-Computer Interactions. Cambridge: 

MIT Press, 2000.

Drabek,  T.  and  D.  McEntire,  “Emergent  Phenomena  and  the  Sociology  of  Disaster:  Lessons, 
Trends and Opportunities from Research Literature,” Disaster Prevention and Management, 
12, 2003, 97–112.

Endsley, M., “Toward a Theory of Situation Awareness in Dynamic Systems,” Human Factors, 31, 

7, 1995, 32–64.

Endsley, M., Designing for Situation Awareness. London: Taylor & Francis, 2003.
Endsley, M. and W. Jones, “A Model of Inter and Intra Team Situation Awareness: Implications 
for Design, Training And Measurement” in M. McNeese, E. Salas and M. Endsley, (eds.), New 
Trends in Cooperative Activities: Understanding System Dynamics in Complex Environments. 
Santa Monica: Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, 2001, 46–67.

Fiori, S., E. Salas, H. Cuevas and C. Bowers, “Distributed Coordination Space: Toward a Theory 
of Distributed Team Process and Performance,” Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics Science, 4, 
3 and 4, 2003, 340–364.

Gauducheau, N., E. Soulier and M. Lewkowicz, “Design and Evaluation of Activity Model-Based 
Groupware: Methedological Issues,” in Proceedings of the 14th IEEE International Workshops 
on  Enabling  Technologies:  Infrastructure  for  Collaborative  Enterprise.  Washington,  DC: 
IEEE Computer Society, 2005, 226–234.

Gerring,  J.,  Case  Study  Research  Principles  and  Practices.  Cambridge:  Cambridge  University 

Press, 2007.

Grint, K. and S. Woolgar, The Machine at Work. Cambridge: Blackwell, 1997.
Harrald,  J.  and  L.  Stoddard,  “Scenario  Based  Identification  and  Structuring  of 
Information Needs for the Response to Complex International Crisis,” in Proceedings of the 
5th  Annual  Conference  of  the  Emergency  Management  Society,  Washington,  DC,  1998, 
295–306.

Hayes, J., Safety Decision Making in High Hazard Organisations at the Production/Maintenance 
Interface  –  A  Literature  Review.  Canberra:  The  Australian  National  University,  National 
Research Centre for OHS Regulation, 2006.

358

P. Antunes et al.

Haynes, S., S. Purao and A. Skattebo, “Situating Evaluation in Scenarios of Use,” in Proceedings 
of the 2004 ACM conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work. Chicago: ACM Press, 
2004, 92–101.

Heinrich, H., Industrial Accident Prevention. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1931.
Herskovic, V., J. Pino, S. Ochoa and P. Antunes, “Evaluation Methods for Groupware Systems” 
in Haake, J., S. Ochoa, and A. Cechich (eds.), Groupware: Design, Implementation, and Use, 
Proceedings of the 13th International Workshop, CRIWG 2007, Bariloche, September 2007. 
Heidelberg: Springer, 2007, 328–336.

Hiles,  A.,  The  Definitive  Handbook  of  Business  Continuity  Management.  West  Sussex:  Wiley, 

2008.

Hollnagel, E., Barriers and Accident Prevention. Hampshire: Ashgate, 2004.
Hollnagel,  E.  and  D.  Woods,  Joint  Cognitive  Systems:  Foundations  of  Cognitive  Systems 

Engineering. Boca Raton: CRC, 2005a.

Hollnagel,  E.  and  D.  Woods,  Joint  Cognitive  Systems:  Introduction  to  Cognitive  Systems 

Engineering. Boca Raton: CRC, 2005b.

Hughes,  J.,  V.  King,  T.  Rodden  and  H.  Andersen,  “Moving  out  from  the  Control  Room: 
Ethnography  in  System  Design,”  Proceedings  of  the  1994  ACM  Conference  on  Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work. Chapel Hill: ACM, 1994, 429–439.

Kanno, T. and K. Furuta, “Resilience of Emergency Response Systems” in E. Hollnagel and E. 
Rigaud  (eds.),  Proceedings  of  the  Second  Resilience  Engineering  Symposium.  Antibes:  Les 
Presses, 2006.

Kelly,  C.,  “Simplifying  Disasters:  Developing  a  Model  for  Complex  Non-Linear  Events,” 

Australian Journal of Emergency Management, 14, 1, 1998, 25–27.

Kwan, M. and J. Lee, “Emergency Response after 9/11: The Potential of Real-Time 3d Gis for 
Quick  Emergency  Response  in  Micro-Spatial  Environments,”  Computers,  Environment  and 
Urban Systems, 29, 2, 2005, 93–113.

Lauwers, J. and K. Lantz, “Collaboration Awareness in Support of Collaboration Transparency: 
Requirements  for  the  Next  Generation  of  Shared  Window  Systems,”  in  Proceedings  of  the 
SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems: Empowering People. Seattle: 
ACM, 1990, 303–311.

MacEachren,  A.,  “Moving  Geovisualization  Toward  Support  for  Group  Work”  in  J.  Dykes,  A. 
MacEachren  and  M.  Kraak  (eds.),  Exploring  Geovisualization.  Amsterdam:  Elsevier,  2005, 
445–462.

Markus,  M.,  A.  Majchrzak  and  L.  Gasser,  “A  Design  Theory  for  Systems  That  Support 
Emergent  Knowledge  Processes,”  Management  Information  Systems  Quarterly,  26,  3, 
2002, 179–212.

McManus, S., E. Seville, D. Brunsdon and J. Vargo, “Resilience Management: A Framework for 

Assessing and Improving the Resilience of Organizations,” Resilient Organizations, 2007.

Miles, M. and A. Huberman, Qualitative Data Analysis. Thousand Oaks: Sage, 1994.
Milis,  K.  and  B.  Walle,  “IT  for  Corporate  Crisis  Management:  Findings  from  a  Survey  in  6 
Different  Industries  on  Management  Attention,  Intention  and  Actual  Use,”  40th  Hawaii 
International Conference on Systems Science. Waikoloa: IEEE Computer Society, 2007.

Möller, K., “Sense-Making and Agenda Construction in Emerging Business Networks – How to 

Direct Radical Innovation,” Industrial Marketing Management, 2009.

Monares,  A.,  S.  Ochoa,  J.  Pino,  V.  Herskovic  and  A.  Neyem,  “Mobilemap:  A  Collaborative 
Application to Support Emergency Situations in Urban Areas,” 13th International Conference 
on Computer Supported Cooperative Work in Design. Santiago: IEEE, 2009, 565–570.

Moore, G., “Cramming More Components onto Integrated Circuits,” Electronics, 38, 8, April 19, 

1965.

Mourão, H. and P. Antunes, “Supporting Effective Unexpected Exceptions Handling in Workflow 
Management  Systems,”  Proceedings  of  the  22nd  Annual  ACM  Symposium  on  Applied 
Computing, Special Track on Organizational Engineering. Seoul: ACM, 2007, 1242–1249.

Muñoz,  M.,  M.  Rodriguez,  J.  Favela,  A.  Martinez-Garcia  and  V.  González,  “Context-Aware 

Mobile Communication in Hospitals,” Computer, 36, 9, 2003, 38–46.

17  Development of a Mobile Situation Awareness Tool Supporting Disaster Recovery 

359

Nielsen,  J.,  “Usability  Inspection  Methods,”  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing 

Systems. Boston: ACM, 1994, 413–414.

Ochoa, S., J. Pino, G. Bravo, N. Dujovne and A. Neyem, “Mobile Shared Workspaces to Support 
Construction  Inspection  Activities”  in  P.  Zarate,  J.  Belaud,  G.  Camileri  and  F.  Ravat  (eds.), 
Collaborative  Decision  Making:  Perspectives  and  Challenges.  Amsterdam:  IOS,  2008, 
211–220.

Perrow,  C.,  Normal  Accidents,  Living  with  High-Risk  Technologies.  Princeton:  Princeton 

University Press, 1999.

Reason, J., Managing the Risks of Organizational Accidents. Surrey: Ashgate, 1997.
Reason,  J.,  The  Human  Contribution:  Unsafe  Acts,  Accidents  and  Heroic  Recoveries.  Surrey: 

Ashgate, 2008.

Reinhard,  W.,  J.  Schweitzer,  G.  Völksen  and  M.  Weber,  “CSCW  Tools:  Concepts  and 

Architectures,” Computer, 27, 5, 1994, 28–36.

Sá, M., L. Carriço and P. Antunes, “Ubiquitous Psychotherapy,” IEEE Pervasive Computing, 6, 1, 

2007, 20–27.

Salas,  E.,  C.  Prince,  D.  Baker  and  L.  Shrestha,  “Situation  Awareness  in  Team  Performance: 

Implications for Measurement and Training,” Human Factors, 37, 1, 1995, 123–126.

Salmon, P., N. Stanton, D. Jenkins, G. Walker, M. Young and A. Aujla, “What Really Is Going 
On? Review, Critique and Extension of Situation Awareness Theory,” Engineering Psychology 
and Cognitive Ergonomics. Heidelberg: Springer, 2007, 407–416.

Salmon, P., N. Stanton, G. Walker and D. Green, “Situation Awareness Measurement: A Review 

of Applicability for C4i Environments,” Applied Ergonomics, 37, 2, 2005, 225–238.

Shu,  Y.  and  K.  Futura,  “An  Inference  Method  of  Team  Situation  Awareness  Based  on  Mutual 

Awareness,” Cognition, Technology & Work, 7, 2005, 272–287.

Smith, K. and P. Hancock, “Situation Awareness Is Adaptive, Externally Directed Consciousness,” 

Human Factors, 37, 1995, 137–148.

Snowden, D. and M. Boone, “A Leader’s Framework for Decision Making,” Harvard Business 

Review, November 2007, 69–76.

Stanton, N., R. Stewart, D. Harris, R. Houghton, C. Baber, R. McMaster, P. Salmon, G. Hoyle, G. 
Walker, M. Young, M. Linsell, R. Dymott and D. Green, “Distributed Situation Awareness in 
Dynamic Systems: Theoretical Development and Application of an Ergonomics Methodology,” 
Ergonomics, 49, 12–13, 2006, 1288–1311.

Steves,  M.,  E.  Morse,  C.  Gutwin  and  S.A.  Greenberg,  “Comparison  of  Usage  Evaluation  and 
Inspection  Methods  for  Assessing  Groupware  Usability,”  in  Proceedings  of  the  2001 
International  ACM  SIGGROUP  Conference  on  Supporting  Group  Work,  Boulder,  2001, 
125–134.

Suchman, L., Plans and Situated Actions: The Problem of Human-Machine Communication. New 

York: MIT Press, 1987.

Tentori,  M.  and  J.  Favela,  “Activity-Aware  Computing  for  Healthcare,”  IEEE  Pervasive 

Computing, 7, 2, 2008, 51–57.

Turoff,  M.,  M.  Chumer,  B.  Van  de  Walle  and  X.  Yao,  “The  Design  of  a  Dynamic  Emergency 
Response  Management  Information  System  (Dermis),”  Journal  of  Information  Technology 
Theory and Application, January 2004.

Vizcaíno,  A.,  M.  Martinez,  G.  Aranda  and  M.  Piattini,  “Evaluating  Collaborative  Applications 
from a Knowledge Management Approach,” 14th IEEE International Workshops on Enabling 
Technologies:  Infrastructure  for  Collaborative  Enterprise  (WETICE’05).  Washington,  DC: 
IEEE CS Press, 2005, 221–225.

Vyhmeister,  R.,  P.  Mondelo  and  M.  Novella,  “Towards  a  Model  for  Assessing  Workers’  Risks 
Resulting  from  the  Implementation  of  Information  and  Communication  Systems  and 
Technologies,” Human Factors in Ergonomics & Manufacturing, 16, 1, 2006, 39–59.

Weick, K., Sensemaking in Organizations. Thousand Oaks: Sage, 1995.
Weick, K., Making Sense of the Organization. Oxford: Blackwell, 2001.
Weick, K. and K. Sutcliffe, Managing the Unexpected: Assuring High Performance in an Age of 

Complexity. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2001.

360

P. Antunes et al.

Woods, D. and E. Hollnagel, Joint Cognitive Systems: Patterns in Cognitive Systems Engineering. 

Boca Raton: CRC, 2006.

Wybo,  J.  and  M.  Latiers,  “Exploring  Complex  Emergency  Situations’  Dynamic:  Theoretical, 
Epistemological  and  Methodological  Proposals,”  International  Journal  of  Emergency 
Management, 3, 1, 2006, 40–51.

Zurita, G., P. Antunes, N. Baloian and F. Baytelman, “Mobile Sensemaking: Exploring Proximity 
and Mobile Applications in the Classroom,” Journal of Universal Computer Science, 13, 10, 
2007, 1434–1448.

Zurita,  G.  and  N.  Baloian,  “Handheld-Based  Electronic  Meeting  Support,”  Lecture  Notes  in 

Computer Science, 3706, 2005, 341–350.

Zurita, G., N. Baloian and F. Baytelman, “A Collaborative Face-to-Face Design Support System 
Based  on  Sketching  and  Gesturing,”  Advanced  Engineering  Informatics,  22,  3,  2008, 
340–349.

