Boosting Participation in Virtual Communities 

Francisco Gutierrez1, Nelson Baloian1, and Gustavo Zurita2 

1 Computer Science Department (DCC), Universidad de Chile, 

Blanco Encalada 2120, Santiago, Chile 

{frgutier,nbaloian}@dcc.uchile.cl 

2 Management Information Systems Department, Universidad de Chile, 

Diagonal Paraguay 257, Santiago, Chile 

gzurita@fen.uchile.cl 

Abstract. We have been experiencing an explosion in the market of social websites 
 that  aim  not  only  to  entertain us, but  also to  help  us  enlarge  our  professional 
 networks,  to  redefine  business  models  and  capture  new  customers,  to 
modify the way learning and teaching are performed, among others. So far, little 
 research  has  been  done  on  what  drives  individuals  to  contribute  to  online 
communities,  as  there  is  not  enough  empirical  evidence  to  validate  wellestablished 
models. In this research we propose to design, develop and test a set 
of principles and functionalities a virtual community should have in order to attempt 
 to  achieve  a  high  degree  of  activity  by  its  members.  We  will  focus,  at 
first, on the particular case of educational virtual communities. We would like 
our results to cover more of the scenarios and area regardless of its content and 
context. 

Keywords:  Motivation,  Participation,  Virtual  Communities,  Social  Networks, 
Collaborative Work, Collaborative Learning. 

1   Introduction 

Over the last few years, we have witnessed an explosion in the development of social 
networks  on  the  Web,  dramatically  changing  the  way  applications  and  services  offered 
 by  various  providers  are  used.  This  is  the  case  of  participative  websites  like 
YouTube, with more than 10 billion videos played each month, Wikipedia, with more 
than  10  million  articles  in  250  different  languages  and  of  different  social  networks 
such  as  Facebook,  with  more  than  500  million  users,  MySpace,  LinkedIn,  among 
many others that expect to reach 1 billion users by 2012 [1]. 

In  the  particular  case  of  social  networks,  and  mainly  virtual  communities,  social 
websites are well accepted and widely used in everyday life by a large number of web 
users.  These  communities  exist  because  people  with  similar  goals,  beliefs  or  values 
lay the basis of an agreement to form and sustain a  virtual existence [2]. This  way, 
internet users belonging to a particular community can track interesting information 
being promoted, discussed or tagged on the Internet [3]. 

However, these ties may not be strong enough to sustain the existence of the community 
 over  time,  resulting  in  members  gradually  leaving  the  virtual  community, 

A.S. Vivacqua, C. Gutwin, and M.R.S. Borges (Eds.): CRIWG 2011, LNCS 6969, pp. 14–29, 2011. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2011 

 

Boosting Participation in Virtual Communities 

15 

leading  to  its  extinction.  For  example,  Butler  states  that  50%  of  social,  hobby  and 
work mailing lists had no traffic over a 122-day period of monitoring. Moreover, the 
lack of a minimal number of contributions is a problem even in successful communi-
ties:  fewer  than  50%  of  subscribers  had  not  posted  even  a  single  message  in  a  4month 
period [4]. 

Some researchers have already studied the reasons why some people are willing to 
contribute and why others tend to be passive. For example, in [5] the authors say that 
research on members who have never actively participated (also referred as to “lurk-
ers”) has revealed many reasons for such inactivity. A study by Preece, Nonnecke and 
Andrews  [6]  found  that  because  lurkers  felt  they  did  not  need  to  post  or  that  they 
needed to find out more about the group before posting. They thought they were already 
being helpful by participating in the community, they could not make the software 
work, and in some cases, because they did not like the group. On the other hand, 
there is a group of community members that Kim [7] describes as “elders”, who are 
active members of the community, regularly posting to share their knowledge and the 
culture of the community. Some of the contributions on why less involved members 
do not participate can be seen in [5] and [8]. 

Online communities are also used as a way for companies to enhance demand for 
their  products  [9].  They  are  also  sometimes  depicted  as  one  of  the  most  effective 
business models. However, the achievement of this goal depends on a comprehensive 
understanding  of  the  members’  motivation  for  contribution,  so  that  the  community 
has enough public goods for consuming. Public goods are defined as those that anyone 
might benefit from, regardless of whether they have helped to contribute to their 
production [10]. Moreover, current business model trends regarding e-content show a 
shift from getting revenues from selling content to the end users towards getting revenues 
from advertisement, and sometimes even providing content free of charge [11]. 
Today,  companies  are  interested  in  developing  more  new  business  opportunities, 
based  on  participative  web  sites,  where  social  media  and  customer-oriented  virtual 
communities  are  the  key  factors  in  developing  revenues  for  companies  in  terms  of 
advertising, and increasing customer satisfaction with regard to brands, products and 
services. 

In the e-learning field, even if online participation and interaction do not necessarily 
translate into higher grades at the end of an academic period, students who did not 
pass the course have been seen to interact less frequently than students who did pass 
[12]. Therefore, motivating students to participate in educational virtual communities 
would be a plausible way to improve their learning experience. 

So far, there is not enough field testing on which elements may trigger participation 
in virtual communities. However, design principles of which functionalities may 
motivate  members  to  contribute  can  be  seen  in  [7]  and  [13],  such  as  improving  the 
usability  and  sociability  of  user  interfaces,  as  well  as  defining  roles  and  members’ 
lifecycle in the community among others. Janzik and Herstatt present a set of incentives,
  such  as:  peer  recognition,  status,  reputation  and  identification,  in  which  community 
members can contribute [14]. 

More than listing a review of what is currently trendy in the fields of participation 
and virtual communities,  we  are interested in defining a  model that helps us understand 
why people contribute to these kinds of web sites and how it is possible to boost 
participation and increase contributions in both quality and quantity.  

16 

F. Gutierrez, N. Baloian, and G. Zurita 

In this research we propose to design, develop and validate a set of principles and 
functionalities that a virtual community should have in order to increase the chances 
that it will be successful. By successful we mean that there will be a high degree of 
activity by its members. In the following sections, we will present the results of preliminary 
testing one of these functionalities, as an example of the methodology, because 
presenting all of them would go beyond the limits of this paper. 

2   Previous Work 

There are already some previous research  works providing guidelines on improving 
participation in virtual communities. In this section we will present some of them: 

2.1   Design Principles 

One  of  the  first  well-established  works  on  this  topic  is  presented  in  [7].  This  work 
presents nine design strategies that characterize successful, sustainable communities. 
Taken together, these summarize an architectural, system-oriented approach to community 
building (called Social Scaffolding by the author). 

The Reader-to-Leader framework [13] presents guidelines for designing robust virtual 
communities. The authors claim users are relatively shy at first and do not interact 
in an appropriate way with the platform. The longer users are engaged, they pass 
through  a  natural  evolution  process,  from  reader  to  contributor,  to  collaborator  and 
finally to leader. Interfaces should include  well-thought-out usability and sociability 
features, such as adaptation to the general context of the community, easy access to 
relevant content through navigation or search, and easy-to-use bookmarking mechanisms,
 among others.  

Girgensohn and Lee [15] present  some design strategies for virtual communities. 
The  main  idea  behind  their  model  is  to  perform  a  continuous  design  idea  for  the 
growth and changes of the community, as well as creating and maintaining feedback 
loops  and  empowering  members  through  time.  The  social  interaction  is  based  on  a 
persistent identity which is based on the users’ behavior, the possibility of modifying 
rules  over  time  pertaining  to  collective  resources  and  having  means  to  monitor  and 
control users’ activities on the site. In order to ensure an appropriate level of activity, 
as well as regular updates of the site, notifications should stand as the core instrument 
for the system administrator to utilize in tuning the system. 

According to Koh, Kim, Butler and Bock [16], it is important for virtual communities 
to support various kinds of multimedia content, as well as to clearly define roles 
following a lifecycle having a leadership pattern.  

In  online  groups,  sometimes  members  seem  to  lack  loyalty,  as  they  often  switch 
from  one  community  to  another  or  use  their  community  less  over  time.  Brandtzaeg 
and Heim [17] discuss the reasons why users become less active or even quit online 
communities. On the other hand, Arguello et al. [18] refer to identifying factors such 
as: Group Identity, Cross-posting, Group Size and Volume, Newcomer Status, Mes-
sages’ Topical Coherence, Word Choice, Linguistic Complexity. 

A framework for social web design is presented in [35]. It is worth highlighting the 
AOF  Method,  a  simple  prioritization  scheme  for  designing  social  web  applications. 

 

Boosting Participation in Virtual Communities 

17 

This method proposes to focus on the activities (i.e., what is the audience doing?), to 
identify the social objects and to choose a core feature set. 

2.2   Theories Derived from Social Psychology 

Beenen,  Ling,  Wang  and  Chang  [19]  state  that  although  not  all  users  in  a  virtual 
community need to contribute to make a group successful, those with a large proportion 
of non-contributors have more difficulties providing the services required by its 
members. Also, if contributions tend to be unique, community members will be more 
motivated to work collaboratively as they feel they will have a greater impact in the 
final result.  

Cheng and Vassileva [20, 21] propose a motivation  strategy based on persuasion 
theories of social psychology addressing the problem of having too few users willing 
to  make  contributions  in  online  communities.  They  introduce  a  set  of  hierarchical 
memberships into a Peer-to-Peer community and reward active users with better quality 
of services by defining a function that measures participation in both quantity and 
quality of contributions. 

Ludford, Cosley, Frankowski and Terveen [22] claim that some of the factors that 
may  trigger  participation  are:  satisfaction  of  personal  needs,  learning,  and  contribution 
to the common good. However, in a group, sometimes people think others will do 
the work. A common belief is that the more the members of a group are similar, the 
better the reception among the other team members will be, thus improving the quantity 
and quality of contributions. However, users of a group with dissimilar members 
tend to contribute more, as they like to find out how they are unique within a group 
thus providing them with this information increases their participation.  

New users in a virtual community  who find their declared friends in the network 
collaborating,  are  more  eager  to  share  more  information  thereafter  [23].  This  is  because 
people tend to follow other people’s behavior, even without external stimuli.  

A model that may help to explain ways to motivate member contributions to online 
communities is presented in [24]. External rewards may affect the degree of intrinsic 
motivation,  so  socially-advanced  users’  contributions  may  cause  lurkers  to  be  more 
active in the community. In order to improve contributions, trust is an important factor,
 and it also lowers the costs and risks of contributing. Also an easy-to-use website 
will have a positive impact in the quantity of contributions, as well as offer a sense of 
group identity and cohesion. 

2.3   Motivation in Online Learning Communities 

It  is  worth  highlighting  the  particular  case  of  virtual  communities  supporting  elearning 
 and  cooperative  learning,  since  there  are  many  sites  devoted  to  this  goal. 
Laghos  in  [34]  presents  the  concepts  of  e-learning  and  e-learning  communities,  as 
well as a review of relevant research in these areas. 

Cooperative learning has been shown to be a successful teaching strategy in which 
small teams, each with students with different levels of ability, use a variety of learning 
activities to improve their knowledge. Students work through the assignment until 
all group members successfully understand and complete it [25]. When using an electronic 
platform, such as an e-learning management system, there is a real advantage 

18 

F. Gutierrez, N. Baloian, and G. Zurita 

when  providing  integrated  functionalities  for  content  authoring  and  management, 
interpersonal  communication  activities,  assessment,  learner  tracking,  among  others 
[26].  

However, assessment may be considered the “weakest link” in e-learning systems. 
E-learning designers have relied predominantly on tools that are aimed at supporting 
the construction of test items. The drawback of such items is that they tend to focus 
on the measurement of low-level retention of isolated facts, rather than on the application 
of knowledge to solve ill-structured problems [27, 28]. This problem is tackled 
and some guidelines are presented in [29]. Lebrun explains in [30] and [31] the methodology 
to design a proper e-learning platform, as well as the problem of motivation,
 or lack of it. 

Vonderwell  and  Zachariah  found  in  [32]  that  technology,  user  interface  design, 
content-area experience, student roles and tasks and information overload have a key 
factor on influencing online learners participation and their patterns. 

3   A Framework for Boosting Users’ Participation 

In this research we aim to define a framework with the key social factors that might 
have  an  impact  on  the  success  of  virtual  communities  by  triggering  motivation  and 
boosting participation. Therefore, we decided to test some ideas derived from social 
psychology theories and some strategies designed by some authors. 

Because of the expanded use of  virtual communities and  collaborative  work in a 
large  number  of  fields,  this  research  may  have  a  positive  impact  towards  creating 
“social  cohesion”  among  its  members  by  triggering  participation.  The  promise  of 
social  participation  applications  is  huge,  generating  a  steady  flow  of  entrepreneurs 
and  technology  activists  who  are  experimenting  with  new  approaches  with  either 
commercial or personal goals [13].  

Until  now,  some  authors  have  recognized  and  tested  particular  factors  that  may 
improve participation in social groups. However, evidence provided by these works is 
only valid for a particular factor and situation. We propose to define a framework that 
might  be  validated  (or  rejected)  with  empirical  testing,  also  giving  hints  about  the 
relative degree of impact of each one of the factors. At first, we will consider these 
factors simply as claims. In this research, we propose five social factors in which that 
we would like to quantify their impact: rankings, peer moderation, challenges, matchmaking 
and notifications. As literature suggests, these are the most critical ones when 
designing a virtual community. 

Our goal here will be to test the pertinence of these elements, as well as analyze the 
impact  they  have  on  users.  We  will  study  the  reasons  why  people  get  motivated  to 
participate in social websites and in which areas community managers and interface 
designers can exploit in order to ensure members’ participation over time. 

We will focus at first in the problem of motivating learners in the context of educational 
virtual communities. However, we expect to generalize some of these results, as 
well as testing the proposed claims in other different kinds of communities in the near 
future. 

 

Boosting Participation in Virtual Communities 

19 

The framework we propose is seen in figure 1. In such a framework there should 
be a model of the type of community for which we are going to address. In this case 
this is represented by a standard core structure with the following functionalities: 

•  User Profile 
•  Friends and Private Messages 
•  Groups 
•  Like/Unlike a comment/action/entity 
•  Public Blog and Forum 
•  Wiki Pages (for Collaborative Work) 

In order to achieve this, we developed a small prototype where we are testing, one at a 
time, the different functionalities that form our proposed model. We chose them because 
of the reported impact they have on triggering participation in previous research 
experiences when studied independently. 

The model we propose is divided in three main sections: 

Social Network Model: we address the social networking model that we will be working 
on. This includes the main features that are expected on these kinds of websites, 
including  standard  features,  such  as  forums,  blogs,  messages,  comments  and  wiki 
pages, among others. 

Technologies: including web-based virtual communities as well as mobile-based virtual 
 communities.  We  aim  to  work  in  different  kinds  of  mobile  devices,  such  as 
smartphones and tablets including geolocation features and an exploration in the use 
of audio-user interfaces. We will also be interested on exploring the use of web standards 
(HTML5 and CSS3). 

Features  that  are  being  tested:  including  the  functionalities  that  were  designed  and 
are being tested for validating (or rejecting) them. 

1) Rankings: we aim to measure the value of contributions by measuring quantity 
and quality, as  Cheng and Vassileva did in [20, 21]. In fact, by adding this kind of 
feature  we  expect  to  encourage  members  to  contribute  and  engage  more  with  the 
group. We will also be interested in exploring how this feature would impact the context 
of a specific virtual community, as well as the way metaphors (this is, the specific 
terminology in the form of labels, tags and categories) need to be defined. A reward 
system linked to users’ ranking in contributions will also be designed. We will also 
define a "participation function" that  will calculate a quantitative  factor that reflects 
the level of participation of a user in a given time in the community. We will consider 
different elements, such as the number and time of log-ins to the server, the number of 
blog/forum topics created, the number of comments that are made in posts, the active 
use of the features offered in the website, among others. Each one of these define an 
"expected task" that will be associated to a weight-factor that will finally add-up the 
value  of  this  function.  The  iterations  of  this  method  will  be  performed  periodically 
(for example, once a week). During a first stage, users will be left free to use the different 
 tools  and  then  they  will  be  initially  classified  into  three  groups:  HIGHparticipation 
 (10%  of  the  users),  MEDIUM-participation  (60%  of  the  users)  and 
LOW-participation  (30%).  Each  group  will  obtain  rewards  that  are  linked  to  their 
 

20 

F. Gutierrez, N. Baloian, and G. Zurita 

 

Fig. 1. Functionalities to be tested during the whole research. In this first paper, we will discuss 
one of them: Rankings. 

category and will either improve or lower their rank. This category will be displayed 
to the whole community, either in form of a simple text-label or an icon that reflects it 
(a golden star for HIGH level users, a red warning sign for LOW ones).  

2)  Peer  moderation: as an extension of the previous point,  we  will add a feature 
that ensures a certain level of quality on contributions when added to the computation 
of a ranking function, as well as empowering members over time by establishing a set 
of categories (as suggested by Kim on [7] and Preece and Shneiderman in [13]). This 
idea has been previously explored and tested by one of the researchers in the development 
 of  an  iPhone  application  dedicated  to  informal  mobile  learning  in  Chinese 
language  for  French-speaking  people  [33]  and  we  expect  this  time  to  gather  more 
field  evidence  on  how  members’  relationships  are  built,  as  well  as  members’  life  

 

Boosting Participation in Virtual Communities 

21 

cycle in the community. This kind of feature can be linked to with the ranking system, 
where we will also consider the moderation made by the whole group in order to ensure 
a certain level of quality of the collaborations. If the users get a higher rank, they 
will be given more permission in order to edit or delete content and ensure their role 
as "community leaders".  

3) Feedback and Notifications: the idea behind this point is explored in [20, 21], 
[15] and [13], among many others. It states that sending feedback to users inside the 
application or via email might help to boost participation at specific stages defined by 
the community manager. During this research, we will analyze the relative impact of 
this feature when boosting participation, as well as studying the existence of a critical 
mass of notifications and its  effects, such as a decrease in the number of collaborations 
due to information overload. 

4)  Match-making  and  Partnership: this idea, explored in [22], addresses the uniqueness 
 and  group  dissimilarity  and  their  impact  on  motivating  participation.  This 
point turns out to be particularly interesting since it could be a way to introduce new 
members into the community and facilitate relationships building between users with 
similar interests. We will also be interested in studying the pertinence of using deci-
sion-making algorithms for matching users in the community for collaborative work. 
Each user will be assigned a "partner" based on their personal affinities and characteristics.
 This can be established by a profile-form applied to the group of users. This 
can also be linked to the "challenge" feature, where users can be forced to reach specific 
goals by cooperation and collaboration. Users will keep their partner as long as 
they reach a certain level of participation; otherwise they will be separated and, maybe,
 be forced to change them. Following a natural evolution of the community, these 
groups will eventually be merged with others, thus ensuring a kind of interaction with 
the  whole  group  or  the  entire  community.  As  before,  a  small  questionnaire  will  be 
applied to the members in order to obtain feedback from them regarding their feelings 
towards this kind of interaction. 

5) Challenges: linked to the previous idea, we are interested in studying the power 
of  challenging  users  in  collaborative  tasks,  when  they  are  forced  to  perform  them 
individually  or  in  groups.  Previous  research  states  that  performance,  rewards  and 
high-reachable goals are interrelated [24]. That way, we expect to introduce new ways 
to participate in a community (other than posting, rating and commenting), improving 
the relative value of a website. This can turn out to be an important tool to motivate 
users to take part in marketing campaigns (in the form of participative call-to-action 
tasks), as well as analyzing the power of gaming features in geolocation applications 
in  mobile-based  virtual  communities.  We  will  place  community  members  in  both, 
individual and collective challenges. We think this will boost peer collaboration and 
cooperative  work  (in  the  case  of  communities  that  allow  this  kind  of  participation). 
For achieving this, we will define a set of reachable goals that then reward or punish 
users depending on their results. In order to ensure participation, we will establish a 
ranking where users will be graded either by the administrator of the community, or 
by  the  whole  group.  A  small  questionnaire  will  be  distributed  to  the  members  for 
feedback on their feelings about this topic. 

A conceptual design model that would help the task of design for participation, pointing 
 out  the  kinds  of  interactions  that  motivate  users,  will  come  out  as  a  result  of  

22 

F. Gutierrez, N. Baloian, and G. Zurita 

analyzing the behavior of community members towards each proposed functionality 
in different kinds of communities. This is the final goal of our whole research work. 

As  we  first  focus  on  communities  linked  to  teaching  and  learning,  we  tested  the 
"ranking" feature with a group of students enrolled in the Advanced Programming of 
Distributed  Applications course  at  Waseda  University  during  February  2011.  This 
experience gave us the first feedback on the interest of students using these kinds of 
tools, as well as data, allowing us to redefine the design of the different functions. 

4   First Results 

During the first stage of the research, we aimed to test some of the principle ideas we 
think will boost participation, as well as gather field information about social patterns 
in collaborative-work environments. For doing this, we developed a small web application,
  as  well  as  a  website  to  provide  support  for  the  Advanced  Programming  of 
Distributed Applications course at Waseda University in February 2011. 

The web support was developed in a standard Apache-MySQL environment, using 
the PHP framework Elgg as a core structure for the social network. Several modifications 
had to be made to the original front-end and back-end Elgg environment in order 
to adapt the different social functionalities offered to the course. These were: personal 
blogs, public forum, collaborative page creation (wikis), status updates (such as intrasite 
tweets), assignments  module (for uploading, commenting and rating the assignments 
prepared by all the students). 

The users of this website were divided in two groups: administrators (two of the re-
searchers) and end-users (the group of 7 students enrolled in this course). Naturally, 
they  were given different degrees of permissions, but the idea behind it was that all 
the students would be able to see the files uploaded by their classmates, first step into 
collaboration  in  the  way  of  asking  for  and  offering  help.  Also,  the  use  of  a  public 
blog, forum and wikis allowed students to take and share notes with everybody. 

All the  students  were free to  use these  tools as they liked, but  we asked them  to 
upload their assignments in the section that was dedicated to this. During the second 
week, we added a rating system to the assignments section (one of the core functionalities,
 in our opinion), as well as a rating system where all the users could easily see 
the level of participation of each student. These levels were: low, medium, high and 
they were calculated periodically (daily), considering the number of threads and topics 
created in blogs and forums, as well as the use of the different functionalities offered 
and the number of log-ins into the website. 

We formulated the following set of hypotheses to test: 

(H1)   Giving  feedback  to  the  students  as  a  visible  tag  of  their  current  level  of  

participation triggers participation 

(H2)  The use of public blogs and forums helps students to work collaboratively in 

their assignments 

(H3)  The possibility of rating peers’ assignments boosts participation when asking 

or offering help 

(H4)  End-users feel the website is more attractive when there are social functionalities 
(H5)  End-users  feel  that  a  rating  system  motivates  them  to  participate  in  the   

community 

 

Boosting Participation in Virtual Communities 

23 

(H6) End-users feel this kind of platform allows them to work better during their 

assignments 

(H7)  End-users feel that this kind of platform finally improved their learning 

In order to test these hypotheses (either validate or refute them), we gathered information 
directly from the interaction between users on the website, as well as their individual 
behavior. Thus, we kept a log of the sessions where we placed attention on the 
blog/forum features and the interaction done in the Assignments section (if any). Using 
this data and during the second week of the study, we calculated on a daily basis, 
a “participation factor” which directly modifies the profiles of users with a label indicating 
their current level of participation, as  well as  giving advice on how they can 
boost this factor. We classified the whole group at first, for having a 25% of “high” 
participation  students,  a  half  of  them  with  the  “medium”  tag,  and  finally  a  25%  of 
“low”.  A  table  was  completed  with  their  daily  participation  levels  in  order  to  keep 
track of the evolution of the process through the second week of the study (hypotheses 
H1 through H3). 

This information was completed with a questionnaire that was applied during the 
last lecture of the course (hypotheses H4 through H7). This survey allowed us to find 
out if students  were conscious of their having boost their  own participation through 
the  experience,  as  well  as  obtain  their  opinion  on  the  usability  and  interest  on  the 
social  features  offered  in  the  website.  Figure  2  shows  the  evolution  of  the  social  
participation  considering  the  actions  performed  by  each  member  of  the  community. 
Figure  3  shows  the  difference  of  raw  participation  score  between  two  consecutive 
iterations for each student.  

For calculating each participation score, we considered the total number of collaborations 
to the community. These were creating a blog entry or a forum thread (earning  
 

Fig. 2. Evolution in the Participation Score of each Student during the Experience 

 

24 

F. Gutierrez, N. Baloian, and G. Zurita 

 
Fig. 3. Differences of the Participation Score between Iterations, for each Student 

2  points  each),  posting  comments  on  assignments  or  blogs  entries  or  forum  threads  
(1 point each), rating classmates' assignments (1 point per rating, limited to one point 
per assignment and a student can't rate his own work) and 1 point bonus for outstanding 
use of the different tools offered by the site (for example, exploring how to send 
messages to a specific user, update their own profile, among others). 

Table 1 presents the evolution of each student's rank:  

Table 1. Evolution of the Rank of Students Enrolled in the Course 

Student 

A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
F 
G 

Starting Point 
February 13 
MEDIUM 
MEDIUM 

LOW 
HIGH 

MEDIUM 
MEDIUM 

HIGH 

Iteration #1 
February 14 
MEDIUM 
MEDIUM 

HIGH 
HIGH 

MEDIUM 

LOW 
HIGH 

Iteration #2 
February 15 
MEDIUM 
MEDIUM 

Iteration #3 
February 16 

LOW 

MEDIUM 

HIGH 
HIGH 
LOW 

HIGH 
HIGH 
LOW 

MEDIUM 

HIGH 

MEDIUM 

HIGH 

Based on this data, we conclude: 

1)  These  results  only  apply  to  this  specific  group,  because  the  population  is  not 

large enough to be considered as statistically representative. 

2) The group of users tends to modify their behavior towards the community when 
their assigned rank is "LOW". In fact, after the starting point during iteration #1 and 
during iteration #2, the students C and F modify dramatically their ranks, maintaining 

 

Boosting Participation in Virtual Communities 

25 

them until the end of the experience. It is worth noting that the student with the worst 
raw score at the beginning of the evaluation period came up with the best score at the 
final iteration.  

3) One user in particular (student G) takes spontaneously the role of "community 
leader" by keeping a log of his class notes in the website, allowing classmates to read 
them at any time.  He also encouraged discussions and created several topics  for allowing 
his classmates to participate. He got the best raw score at the beginning of the 
evaluation period. 

4) Once the users got the label "HIGH", they kept it during the whole evaluation 
period by participating constantly. Otherwise, those who were put in the "MEDIUM" 
group were not eager to modify their rank as long as they do not lower their reputation 
in the community. In future experiences, it would be worth considering "rewards" 
and "punishments" for users who grade up or down in their ranks. 

5) One of the most critical features used by the users to improve their participation 
in the site was the "rating" (in the form of golden stars) given to the different assignments 
of their classmates. 

6) The quality of contributions (posts / comments) remained of high quality during 
the whole evaluation period. Some students even used the forum to create discussions 
not necessarily related to their lectures, their assignments or they used it for asking for 
help. However, this may be due to the fact the evaluation period was quite short and 
the users maybe did not understand how their scores were calculated nor the impact of 
creating a topic or commenting on different posts. 
After this first analysis, we may validate in this group hypothesis (H1) - "Giving feedback 
to the students as a visible tag of their current level of participation triggers par-
ticipation",  since  users  C  and  F  dramatically  changed  their  ranks  after  noticing  their 
status. In the same way, we confirm for this group hypothesis (H2) - "The use of public 
blogs  and  forums  helps  students  to  work  collaboratively  on  their  assignments"  after 
examining the kind of threads and blog entries created, that were related to asking for 
help while performing their tasks. Finally, we confirm for this group hypothesis (H3) as 
well - "The possibility of rating peers’ assignments boosts participation when asking or 
offering help", since this element was positively used by students to improve their ranks. 
Table 2 summarizes the mean score given to each item in the questionnaire taken 

by the group of students at the end of their course: 

Table 2. Mean Score given to each Item in the Questionnaire 

Item 

Mean Score 
(Out of 5) 

Do you think the social features of the website make it more  
attractive? 
Do you think the rank given to you in the website (HIGH – 
MEDIUM – LOW) motivated you to participate more in the  
website? 
Were you interested in using the website to ask for help when doing 
your assignments? 
Do you think you improved your learning by discussing the blogs or 
forums in the website with your classmates? 

4.50 

4.33 

4.17 

3.83 

26 

F. Gutierrez, N. Baloian, and G. Zurita 

Hypothesis (H4) – “End-users feel the website is more attractive when there are social 
functionalities” – was validated in this group. In fact, the mean score given to this 
item in the questionnaire was the highest one of all. In an open question, we asked the 
students to state the elements they considered to have motivated them to participate 
on a website. The range of answers here starts from standard web 2.0 tools (such as 
blogs  and  forums),  towards  a  more  interactive  and  synchronous  participation  in  the 
form of online chat rooms (because they think it takes time to get replies in a blog or 
forum). One of the students also stated the use of the “my state” feature (a microblogging 
service, in the same spirit as Facebook status and Twitter). 

Hypotheses (H5) – “End-users feel that a rating system motivates them to participate 
in the community” – and (H6) – “End-users feel this kind of platform allows them to 
work  better  during  their  assignments”  –  were  related  to  the  interest  of  the  students 
towards the website when working and participating. We may also validate them according 
to the mean score given to each item by this particular group. However, some 
students  criticize  the  fact  that  the  lessons,  worked  examples  and  supports  were  not 
updated regularly enough and there was a lack of feedback and comments from professors 
in order to encourage them to participate more between them (some students 
feel the others are too proud to ask and offer any kind of help). 

Finally, from the results of hypothesis (H7) – “End-users  feel that this kind of platform 
finally improved their learning” – we conclude there has to be a strong feedback 
from professors in order to encourage students to participate, as well as enhancing the 
values of collaboration and of the community. Perhaps, a teacher should take a more 
active role in the form of a “community manager”, going further than sharing knowledge 
and enabling students to ask and offer help while doing their assignments. 

It is worth pointing out that these claims are only applicable to this specific group, 
because it is not statistically representative (the number of users and the duration are 
too  slam  to  produce  significant  results)  and  since  it  is  not  clear  if  the  contribution 
trends  will  continue  of  the  experiment  lasts  longer.  In  fact,  previous  work  [20,  21] 
shows  that contribution levels usually  spike after introducing  the incentive  mechanism 
but later they decline, which could be due to the “novelty effect”. This first field 
experience  was  a  very  short-term  study  aimed  to  explore  the  usefulness  of  the  research 
methodology. 

5   Future Work 

This paper presents the first results on this research. In order to validate the model we 
propose, we are currently testing the design of the other functionalities with a group 
of Chilean high-school students (14-18 years old) and teachers, in collaboration with 
Innovacien  (http://www.innovacien.org),  a  centralized  network  of  schools.  These 
schools are physically separated from one another (some of them in different cities), 
and they work independently on different learning projects guided by this group. By 
developing  this  virtual  community,  we  aim  to  make  the  different  groups  to  interact 
with each other and finally work collaboratively. 

This virtual community will be in service during, at least, for three months and it 
will serve as support to the educational projects carried out by this group. Moreover, 

 

Boosting Participation in Virtual Communities 

27 

students and teachers will have a place where they are able to collaborate in order to 
achieve common goals, as well as have a central communication hub. 

Our goal with this experiment is to measure how and why the different elements 
involved in a virtual community are used, quantify the degree of participation before 
and after enabling in the community our designed features and, as a general objective, 
analyze the ways that impact the group members' behavior in order to trigger motivation 
and boost participation. 

This virtual community was developed taking the framework we designed and using 
the social networking engine Elgg with some minor and major modifications in its 
core structure. It runs under an  Apache-MySQL-PHP environment supported by Innovacien.
 Also, a set of customized plugins was developed in order to test each social 
feature. 

Members  are  divided  in  three  categories:  system  administrators,  group  leaders 
(which  will  be  mainly  teachers)  and  students.  Each  role  interacts  within  its  scope, 
defined  by  the  project  that  they  are  enrolled  in.  Teachers  will  also  have  access  to 
guidelines prepared by Innovacien in order to work smoothly with their students. 

In a future work, we plan to redefine this framework in order to be able to deal with 
mobile  virtual  communities,  as  well  as  exploring  the  pertinence  and  impact  of  using 
these social functionalities. Some ideas to explore at this stage are the use of geolocation 
support and audio-user interfaces (AUI) to ensure mobility. We will also explore the use 
of web standards (HTML5 and CSS3) and how this impacts the development of these 
kinds of applications in different kinds of devices, both desktop-based and mobile. The 
last stage of this research will concern decision-making patterns, as well as intelligent 
recommender social algorithms in collaborative and cooperative relationships. 

6   Conclusions 

In this paper we presented the design of a model of functionalities that may have an 
impact on boosting participation in virtual communities. Finding ways to trigger motivation 
in social groups will have a wide impact on a large group of fields, from ebusiness,
  marketing and  management  where companies  use social  media techniques 
for generating revenues and increasing their market share, to education, where boosting 
participation will be reflected in a better learning experience. 

We explored one of the features we designed in a group of college students and the 
results are quite promising. As this paper is being developed, we are performing experiments 
testing the other functionalities defined in the proposed model. 

We learned from this first experiment that the members of a virtual community can 
easily adopt this initial approach, as it was positively revealed during this experience. 
Therefore, we will carry out more elaborated research trying to test more social features,
 as well as evaluating the perceived impact on the members. We will also quantify 
the eventual changes on the level of participation of each user and refine the model 
in order to develop a methodology for designing social features to boost participation 
in virtual communities. 

In a future work, we will study the effects of such a redefinition in mobile virtual 
communities, mainly working with geolocation features and audio-user interfaces. We 
will also explore the use of Web Standards, such as HTML5 and CSS3, and analyzing 

28 

F. Gutierrez, N. Baloian, and G. Zurita 

the pertinence of decision-making patterns and algorithms, as  well as intelligent recommender 
systems. 

Finally, a conceptual design model that would help the task of design for participation 
will come out as a result of analyzing the impact of these functionalities in different 
kinds of communities. 

References 

1.  Alexa: The Web Information Company (February 15, 2009), http://www.alexa.com 
2.  Figallo,  C.:  Hosting  Web  Communities:  Building  Relationships,  Increasing  Customer 

Loyalty and Maintaining a Competitive Edge. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester (1998) 

3.  Wellman, B., Gulia, M.: The Network Basis for Social Support: A Network is More than 
the  Sum  of  its  Ties.  In:  Wellman,  B.  (ed.)  Networks  in  the  Global  Village,  pp.  83–118. 
Westview Press, Boulder CO (1999) 

4.  Butler,  B.:  Membership  Size,  Communication  Activity  and  Sustainability:  A  ResourceBased 
Model of Online Social Structures. Information Systems Research 12(4), 346–362 
(2001) 

5.  Bishop,  J.:  Increasing  Participation  in  Online  Communities:  A  Framework  for  HumanComputer 
Interaction. Computers in Human Behavior 23, 1881–1893 (2007) 

6.  Preece,  J.,  Nonnecke,  B.,  Andrews,  D.:  The  Top  Five  Reasons  for  Lurking:  Improving 
Community  Experiences  for  Everyone.  Computers  in  Human  Behavior 20,  201–223 
(2004) 

7.  Kim,  A.J.:  Community  Building  on  the  Web:  Secret  Strategies  for  Successful  Online 

Communities. Peachpit Press, Berkeley (2000) 

8.  Vassileva,  J.:  Motivating  Participation  in  Peer  to  Peer  Communities.  In:  Petta,  P., 
Tolksdorf, R., Zambonelli, F. (eds.) ESAW 2002. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 2577, pp. 141–155. 
Springer, Heidelberg (2003) 

9.  Miller,  K.,  Fabian,  F.,  Lin,  S.-J.:  Strategies  for  Online  Communities.  Strategic  Management 
Journal 30, 305–322 (2009) 

10.  Wang, Y., Fesenmaier, D.: Understanding the Motivation of Contribution in Online Com-

munities: An Empirical Investigation of an Online Travel Community, Illinois (2001) 

11.  Konow, R., Tan, W., Loyola, L., Pereira, J., Baloian, N.: Using Recommender Systems to 

Improve Revenues from Advertising in e-Content Sites (2010) 

12.  Davies,  J.,  Graff,  M.:  Performance  in  e-Learning:  Online  Participation  and  Students 

Grades. British Journal of Educational Technology 36, 657–663 (2005) 

13.  Preece,  J.,  Shneiderman,  B.:  The  Reader-to-Leader  Framework:  Motivating  TechnologyMediated 
 Social  Participation.  AIS  Transactions  on  Human-Computer  Interaction, 1(1), 
13–32 (2009) 

14.  Janzik, L., Herstatt, C.: Innovation Communities: Motivation and Incentives for Community 
 Members  to  Contribute.  In:  Management  of  Innovation  and  Technology,  ICMIT,  pp. 
350–355 (2008) 

15.  Girgensohn, A., Lee,  A.: Making Web Sites Be Places for Social Interaction. In: CSCW 
2002  Proceedings  of  the  2002  ACM  Conference  on  Computer  Supported  Cooperative 
Work, New York (2002) 

16.  Koh, J., Kim, Y.-G., Butler, B., Bock, G.-W.: Encouraging Participation in Virtual Communities.
 Communications of the ACM 50 (2007) 

 

Boosting Participation in Virtual Communities 

29 

17.  Brandtzaeg, P., Heim, J.: User Loyalty and Online Communities: Why Members of Online 
Communities are not Faithful. In: Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Intelligent 
Technologies for Interactive Entertainment, Brussels (2007) 

18.  Arguello, J., Butler, B., Joyce, E., Kraut, R., Ling, K., Rosé, C., Wang, X.: Talk to Me: 
Foundations for Successful Individual-Group Interactions in Online Communities. In: Proceedings 
of CHI 2006, Montreal (2006) 

19.  Beenen, G., Ling, L., Wang, X., Chang, K., Frankowski, D.: Using Social Psychology to 

Motivate Contributions to Online Communities. In: CSCW 2004, Chicago (2004) 

20.  Cheng, R., Vassileva, J.: User Motivation and Persuasion Strategy for Peer-to-Peer Communities.
 In: Proceedings of the 38th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 
Hawaii (2005) 

21.  Cheng, R., Vassileva, J.: Design and Evaluation of an Adaptive Incentive Mechanism for 
Sustained  Educational  Online  Communities.  User  Modeling  and  User-Adapted  Interaction 
16, 321–348 (2006) 

22.  Luford,  P.,  Cosley,  D.,  Frankowski,  D.,  Terveen,  L.:  Think  Different:  Increasing  Online 
Community Participation Using Uniqueness and Group Dissimilarity. In: CHI 2004, Vienna 
(2004) 

23.  Burke, M., Marlow, C., Lento, T.: Feed Me: Motivating Newcomer Contribution in Social 

Network Sites. In: CHI 2009, Boston (2009) 

24.  Tedjamulia,  S.,  Olsen,  D.,  Dean,  D.,  Albrecht,  C.:  Motivating  Content  Contributions  to 
Online Communities: Toward a More Comprehensive Theory. In: Proceedings of the 38th 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, Hawaii (2005) 

25.  http://edtech.kennesaw.edu/intech/cooperativelearning.html 

(last consulted on February 26, 2011) 

26.  Trentin,  G.:  Networked  Collaborative  Learning:  Social  Interaction  and  Active  Learning. 

Chandos Publishing, Oxford (2010) 

27.  Baker, E.L., Mayer, R.E.: Computer-Based Assessment of Problem Solving. Computers in 

Human Behavior 15, 269–282 (1999) 

28.  Reeves,  T.C.:  Alternative  Assessment  Approaches  for  Online  Learning  Environments  in 

Higher Education. Journal of Educational Computing Research 23, 101–110 (2000) 

29.  Sluijsmans,  D.,  Martens,  R.:  Performance  Assessment  in  Integrated  e-Learning.  In:  Jochems,
 W., Van Merriënboer, J., Koper, R. (eds.) Integrated E-Learning: Implications for 
Pedagogy, Technology & Organization, pp. 39–50. Routledge Farmer, London (2004) 

30.  Lebrun, M.: Des Technologies pour Enseigner et Apprendre. De Boeck Université, Brussels 
(2007) 

31.  Lebrun,  M.:  E-Learning  pour  Enseigner  et  Apprendre.  De  Boeck  Academia  Bruylant, 

Louvain-la-Neuve (2005) 

32.  Vonderwell,  S.,  Zachariah,  S.:  Factors  that  Influence  Participation  in  Online  Learning. 

Journal of Research on Technology in Education (2005) 

33.  Gutierrez,  F.:  Développement  de  Fonctionnalités  de 

type  Réseau  Social  pour 
l’Apprentissage Mobile – Étude de Cas sur l’Application Parlez-vous Chinois? In: Engineering 
 Internship  report  at  Centre  d’Appui  aux  Pratiques  d’Enseignement,  Ecole  des 
Mines de Nantes, Ecole Centrale de Nantes, Nantes (2010) 

34.  Laghos, A.: E-Learning Communities. In: Zaphiris, P., Siang Ang, C. (eds.) Social Computing 
and Virtual Communities, pp. 69–89. Taylor and Francis Group, Boca Raton (2010) 

35.  Porter, J.: Designing for the Social Web, pp. 21–40. New Riders, Berkeley (2008) 

