 

SmartCity: Public Transportation Network Planning  

Based on Cloud Services, Crowd Sourcing  

and Spatial Decision Support Theory 

Jonathan Frez1, Nelson Baloian2, and Gusravo Zurita3 

1 School of Informatics & Telecommunications Engineering,  

Universidad Diego Portales, Santiago, Chile 

2 Department of Computer Science, University of Chile, Beauchef 851, Santiago, Chile 

3 Information Systems and Managment Department. Universidad de Chile,  

Diagonal Paraquay 257, CP 8330015 Santiago, Chile 

jonathan.frez@gmail.com, nbaloian@dcc.uchile.cl, 

gzurita@fen.uchile.cl  

Abstract.  Cities  are  growing  and  the  number  people  using  smartphone’s  and 
tablets  it  also  increasing.  There  are  many  applications  that  collects  data  from 
users  and  its  context.  Some  of  these  applications  are  producing  complete  and 
useful databases that can be used to support some cites problems. In particular 
spatial planning problems like transportation network planning. In this work we 
presented  a  method  to  use  existing  crowdsourcing  data  and  cloudservices  to 
support a transportation network decision making process. The method is based 
the Dempster-Shafer Theory to combine the different sources information and 
to model transportation demand.  

Keywords:  mobile  data,  probabilistic  scenarios,  Dempster-Shafer  theory, 
transportation network, crowdsourcing, cloudservices. 

1 

Introduction 

Cities  are  constantly  growing  as  they  requirements.  The  cities  decision  making 
problems  are  becoming  more  complex,  and  better  methods  to  evaluate  solutions 
alternatives are needed in order to support this growing [1].  

Several  of  the  decision  problems  are  related  to  spatial  context.  A  typical  spatial 
problem is to define a place or area to support an specific requirement or service. For 
example, where to build a new street, set a residential or industrial area, place parks, 
commercial  areas,  hospitals.  Furthermore,  cities  are  constantly  changing,  are  they 
have  dynamic  problems,  for  example  in  public  transportation  services.  The 
transportations  routes  can  be  dynamically  defined  in  order  to  respond  to  dynamic 
requirement and restrictions. Some of the decisions related to this problem are where 
to  place  a  bus  station,  define  a  route,  define  multiple  routes,  or  even  a  full 
transportation network. 

R. Hervás et al. (Eds.): UCAmI 2014, LNCS 8867, pp. 365–371, 2014. 
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014 

366 

J. Frez, N. Baloian, and G. Zurita 

According  to  [2],  a  “Smart  City”  is  city  that  monitors  and  integrates  data  and 
information  of  its  critical  infrastructures,  including  roads,  bridges,  tunnels,  rails, 
subways, airports, seaports in order to better optimize its resources, and maximizing 
services to its citizens.  

At  same  time,  citizens  are  using  information  technologies  (IT)  to  consume  and 
provide data that can be used to support the decision making process of several of the 
new  and  old  requirement  of  cities..  Some  of  the  (IT)  used  by  citizens  can  be  are 
supported by Cloud Computing Services providing Software as a Service (SaaS). The 
software as a  Service  model  of Cloud Computing, are often accessed by citizens as 
mobile  applications  and  web  interfaces  [3].  Some  of  the  SaaS  services  with  spatial 
data  properties  are  for  example  Google  Maps,  OpenStreetMaps  and  WAZE.  These 
services provides geo-localized data in a graphical way, they are free, and they share a 
singular characteristic: They use Crowdsourcing data to provide data. 

In this paper, we used the services provided by Google Maps, OpenStreetMaps and 
Waze,  to  develop  a  Spatial  Decision  Support  System  (SDSS)  for  transportation 
network  planning.  Specifically  the  Origin-Destination  (OD)  evaluation.  In  order  to 
deal with uncertain and incomplete data sources we propose to evaluate de OD using 
a DSS theory called Dempster Schaffer Theory[4]. This Theory is designed to model 
decisions  based  on  uncertain  and  incomplete  data,  by  modelling  “how  much”  a 
hypotheses can be supported by data. 

2 

Related Work 

According  to  [5],  a  “Smart  City”  is  intended  as  an  urban  environment  which, 
supported by pervasive IT systems, is able to offer advanced and innovative services 
to citizens in order to improve the overall quality of their life.  

 In [6], a user-friendly web-based spatial decision support system (wSDSS) aimed 
at  generating  optimized  vehicle  routes  for  multiple  vehicle  routing  problems  that 
involve  serving  the  demand  located  along  arcs  of  a  transportation  network  is 
presented. The wSDSS incorporates Google Maps™ (cartography and network data), 
a database, a heuristic and an ant-colony meta-heuristic developed by the authors to 
generate routes and detailed individual vehicle route maps. It accommodates realistic 
system  specifics,  such  as  vehicle  capacity  and  shift  time  constraints,  as  well  as 
network constraints such as one-way streets and prohibited turns. The wSDSS can be 
used  for  “what-if”  analysis  related  to  possible  changes  to  input  parameters  such  as 
vehicle capacity, maximum driving shift time, seasonal variations of demand, network 
modifications,  and  imposed  arc  orientations.  The  system  was  tested  for  urban  trash 
collection in Coimbra, Portugal. 

is 

important  crowdsourcing  database 

the  OpenStreetMap  project  [7]. 
Worldwide,  several  volunteers  are  currently  contributing  information  to  this  “free” 
geodatabase.  In some cases this databases exceeds proprietary ones by a 27% [8], and 
for  some  authors  [9]  it  is  even  more  complete  that  Google  maps  or  Bing  maps. 
OpenStreetmap information has been proposed to support traffic related decisions by 
develop  traffic  simulations  [10],  or  solutions  to  achieve  a  new  web  based  trip 
optimization  tool  [11].  It  has  been  also  used  to  support  transportation  network 

An 

 

 

SmartCity: Public Transportation Network Planning Based on Cloud Services 

367 

planning [12].  Furthermore, due to the recent interest in spatially aware systems for 
pedestrian  routing  and  city  exploration;  plus  the  proliferation  of  smartphones  with 
GPS receivers among the general public, but at the same time due to their problems of 
noisy  and  inaccuracy,  in  [13]  it  is  described  a  spoken-dialogue  prototype  for 
pedestrian navigation in Stockholm by using various grounding strategies and based 
on OpenStreetMaps. Similarly, Jacob et al. [14], present a web-based, multi-lingual, 
campus guidance system with emphasis on pedestrian navigation aimed at providing 
support for delegates attending International  Conferences at the  National University 
of  Ireland  Maynooth  campus.  They  develop  a  system  based  on  OpenStreetMap  for 
generate shortest pedestrian paths using both outdoor pavements and indoor corridors 
between various buildings and points of interests.  

A  well-known  and  popular  crowdsourcing  geodatabase  is  being  generated  by 
Waze.  Waze  is  mobile  GPS  application  that  allows  to  measure  and  report  different 
traffic conditions and events. For examples it automatically detects traffic jams, users 
can report accidents, objects in the road, weather effects on the roads, and other kind 
of alerts. In the literature we did not find a decision support systems using Waze data, 
the  main  reason  could  be  because  it  is  hard  to  obtain.  However,  we  found  traffic 
condition  analysis  systems  [15]  based  on  real  time  data  obtained  from  Waze.com 
using a WebCrawler, and a accidents data mining analysis proposal [16] based on the 
same real time data from the web page of Waze.com. In this work the data is obtained 
using  the  same  technique,  we  developed  a  WebCrawler  to  reconstruct  an  historical 
database based on the published data on waze.com. 

The  literature  regarding  spatial  decision  support  systems  we  are  focused  on  the 
trend  to  use  belief  functions  [17],  in  particular  Dempster-Shafer  Theory.  The 
Dempster-Shafer theory was developed in 1967 by Dempster and extended by Shafer. 
It proposes to use sets of hypotheses regarding a variable (e.g. the temperature values 
in  X  are  always  between  t1  and  t2)  associated  with  a  probability  of  being  correct. 
Using Belief functions we can provide a “hypotheses support value” called belief. The 
belief can be assigned to a certain geographical area that accomplish a hypotheses set. 

3 

The OD Route Problem 

Regional  transportation  networks  are  composed  transportation  lines,  railways, 
highway,  and  different  transportation  are  designed  to  cooperate  and  complement  an 
urban  scale  transportation  solution  [18].  The  planning  of  the  paths  or  routes  of  the 
new  or  existing  transportation  methods  are  usually  based  on  existing  basic  data,  of 
transportation network, volume predictions and the distribution in the network, [19]. 

When  a  decision  maker  chooses  a  route,  the  travel  time  and  time  reliability  are 
important  factors  under  demand  and  supply  uncertainty.  According  to  [20],  modern 
urban  road  transportation  design  is  to  optimize  the  system  performance,  make  the 
traveler arrive in destination conveniently and quickly. Furthermore, when designing 
an  urban  route  for  a  new  transportation  service,  the  choices  must  consider  the 
behavior and reliability of transportation network. Another important factor is the OD 
traffic  demand  [21].  The  OD  describe  the  quantity  of  traffic  demand  between  a 
particularly OD during a time period.  

 

368 

J. Frez, N. Baloian, and G. Zurita 

A public transportation system is a complex network. In Santiago de Chile city it is 
composed  by  bus  stations,  bus  routes,  subway  stations,  and  subway  routes,  shared 
taxy stations and shared taxy routes. Each OD are composed by a start station and an 
ending station. A single OD can have multiple sub-OD in a single route.  The design 
of a public transportation system is a complex task that requires to analyze the public 
demand for transportation, the traffic demands of the alternative routes for each OD, 
and  the  reliability  of  the  OD.  In  order  to  define  an  OD  route  base  on  uncertain 
demand  information,  we  propose  to  adapt  a  concept  named  Belief  Maps  [17].  This 
concept is based on the Dempster-Shafer Theory. A Belief Maps allows to evaluate a 
geographical  area  generating  a  suitability  evaluation  about  a  set  of  hypotheses  that 
support a solutions proposal. For example, Figure 1 shows the belief degree of find 
people in each evaluated area. The hypotheses that supports this map can be “People 
goes to commercial areas”, or “People can be in industrial areas or schools”. 

 

Fig. 1. Belief Map Example, Where people can be 

 

4 

Determining the OD Route  

Using Belief Maps we propose a new concept called Belief Routes (BR). A BR can 
be used to evaluate demand hypotheses of an OD. A Belief Route is composed by 3 
basic elements: A set of hypotheses that defines a possible transportation demand of 
an OD; The Origin and Destination; The “polyline” or path of the route. Using this 
definition of Belief Route, the decision maker can compare different paths evaluating 
the  demand  requirements  in  each  OD.  Furthermore,  the  decision  maker  can  also 
adjust  the  Origin  or  Destiny.  Another  important  factor  in  the  OD  evaluation  is  the 
transportation  and  reliability  time.  In  order  to  support  both  indicator  we  propose  to 
combine the traffic information from Waze creating a belief value based on historical 
data. We call the result of this combination as Belief Congestion Route (BCR).  

In order to explain the use of the BR and BCR in the decision making processes we 
are going to use a basic example: A single OD with 2 alternative paths.  In Figures 2 
and  3,  two  different  alternatives  are  show  (A  and  B  respectively).  In  this  example 
route  A  is  shorten  than  B,  and  the  travel  time  is  also  shorter  according  to  Google 
Directions API. 

 

 

 

SmartCity: Public Transportation Network Planning Based on Cloud Services 

369 

 

 

Fig. 2. Route A 

Fig. 3.   Route B 

 
In figures 4 and 5, the transportation demand is represented by a BR, according the 

OpenStreetMap and the proposed hypothesis, route B as more demand than route A.  

 

Fig. 4.   Belief route A 

 

Fig. 5. Belief route B 

 

 
In  figures  6  and  7  the  BCR  of  each  route  are  shown.  According  to  the  Waze 
information of both paths, the route A as more belief of having congestions or traffic 
jams witch implies less reliability. 

 

Fig. 6. Congestion route A 

 

 

Fig. 7. Congestion route B 

 

From the example we can note that route B has less congestion and more demand 
that route A. However route A is shorter and the desition will depend of what kind of 
OD  the  decision  maker  is  looking  for.  In  order  to  support  the  decision,  the  visual 
evaluation of the BR and BCR is not enough.  An evaluation  metrics  framework  is 
needed and it will be part of the future work. 

 

370 

J. Frez, N. Baloian, and G. Zurita 

4.1  Description of the Application  

The developed prototype allows to define an OD pair and it automatically provides 
the  shortest  route  using  the  Google  Route  Service.  It  also  provide  a  hypotheses 
specification method for transportation demand modelling and it generates two types 
of visualization: The demand Belief route and the Congestion route (see Fig 8). The 
platform provide Average Belief of the generated 3D visualization. 

 

Fig. 8. Evaluation of an OD using the developed application 

 

The  application  allows  to  set  a  transportation  demand  hypotheses  set  compatible 
with the Dempster-Shaffer Theory. It also allows to include some model restrictions, 
for example: avoid schools.  After the hypotheses are included, the application allows 
to choose the type of 3d map will be generated: BR or BCR. 

5 

Conclusions 

In this work we presented a method to use existing crowdsourcing data to support a 
transportation  network  decision  making  process.  The  method  uses  the  DempsterShafer 
Theory to provide a framework to model transportation demand based on the 
OpenStreetMap  Data.  The  method  also  provide  a  simple  way  of  use  the  Waze 
application data to provide a congestion probability value to each segment of a route.  
In  this  work  we  propose  that  the  use  of  croudsourcing  data  to  build  the 
transportation demand metric and the congestion probability it is possible to support a 
transportation network decision making process.  

References 

1.  Heilig, G.K.: World urbanization prospects the 2011 revision. United Nations, Department 
of Economic  and Social Affairs  (DESA), Population Division, Population Estimates and 
Projections Section, New York (2012) 

2.  Harrison,  C.,  et  al.:  Foundations  for  smarter  cities.  IBM  Journal  of  Research  and 

Development 54(4), 1–16 (2010) 

 

 

SmartCity: Public Transportation Network Planning Based on Cloud Services 

371 

3.  Chourabi, H., et al.: Understanding smart cities: An integrative framework. In: 2012 45th 

Hawaii International Conference on System Science (HICSS). IEEE (2012) 

4.  Shafer,  G.:  A  mathematical  theory  of  evidence,  vol. 1.  Princeton  university  Press, 

Princeton (1976) 

5.  Piro,  G.,  et  al.:  Information  centric  services  in  Smart  Cities.  Journal  of  Systems  and 

Software 88, 169–188 (2014) 

6.  Santos, L., Coutinho-Rodrigues, J., Antunes, C.H.: A web spatial decision support system 

for vehicle routing using Google Maps. Decision Support Systems 51(1), 1–9 (2011) 

7.  Haklay,  M.,  Weber,  P.:  Openstreetmap:  User-generated  street  maps.  IEEE  Pervasive 

Computing 7(4), 12–18 (2008) 

8.  Neis,  P.,  Zielstra,  D.,  Zipf,  A.:  The  street  network  evolution  of  crowdsourced  maps: 

OpenStreetMap in Germany 2007–2011. Future Internet 4(1), 1–21 (2011) 

9.  Ciepłuch,  B.,  et  al.:  Comparison  of  the  accuracy  of  OpenStreetMap  for  Ireland  with 
Google Maps and Bing Maps. In: Proceedings of the Ninth International Symposium on 
Spatial  Accuracy  Assessment  in Natural  Resuorces  and Enviromental  Sciences,  July  2023.
 University of Leicester (2010) 

10.  Zilske,  M.,  Neumann,  A.,  Nagel,  K.:  OpenStreetMap  for  traffic  simulation.  In: 

Proceedings of the 1st European State of the Map–OpenStreetMap Conference (2011) 

11.  Klug,  M.:  CS  Transport-Optimisation–A  Solution  for  Web-based  Trip  Optimization 

Basing on OpenStreetMap. In: 19th ITS World Congress (2012) 

12.  Joubert,  J.W.,  Van  Heerden,  Q.:  Large-scale  multimodal  transport  modelling.  Part  1: 

Demand generation (2013) 

13.  Boye, J., et al.: Walk this way: Spatial grounding for city exploration. In: Natural Interaction 

with Robots, Knowbots and Smartphones, pp. 59–67. Springer, Heidelberg (2014) 

14.  Jacob,  R.,  Zheng,  J.,  Ciepłuch,  B.z.,  Mooney,  P.,  Winstanley,  A.C.:  Campus  guidance 
system  for  international  conferences  based  on  OpenStreetMap.  In:  Carswell,  J.D., 
Fotheringham,  A.S.,  McArdle,  G.  (eds.)  W2GIS  2009.  LNCS,  vol. 5886,  pp.  187–198. 
Springer, Heidelberg (2009) 

15.  Silva, T.H., de Melo, P.O.S.V., Viana, A.C., Almeida, J.M., Salles, J., Loureiro, A.A.F.: 
Traffic Condition is More than Colored Lines on a Map: Characterization of Waze Alerts. 
In:  Jatowt,  A.,  et  al.  (eds.)  SocInfo  2013.  LNCS,  vol. 8238,  pp.  309–318.  Springer, 
Heidelberg (2013) 

16.  Fire, M., et al.: Data mining opportunities in geosocial networks for improving road safety. 
In:  2012  IEEE 27th  Convention of  Electrical  &  Electronics  Engineers  in  Israel  (IEEEI). 
IEEE (2012) 

17.  Frez,  J.,  et  al.:  Dealing  with  Incomplete  and  Uncertain  Context  Data  in  Geographic 
Information  Systems.  In:  IEEE  (ed.)  Computer  Supported  Cooperative  Work  in  Design 
(CSCWD), pp. 129–134. IEEE, Hsinchu (2014) 

18.  Yang,  L.,  Wan,  B.:  A  Multimodal  Composite  Transportation  Network  Model  and 
Topological  Relationship  Building  Algorithm. 
International  Conference  on 
Environmental Science and Information Application Technology, ESIAT 2009. IEEE (2009) 
19.  Liu,  S.,  et  al.: Modeling  and  simulation  on  multi-mode  transportation network.  In:  2010 
International  Conference  on  Computer  Application  and  System  Modeling  (ICCASM). 
IEEE (2010) 

In: 

20.  Xu, L.,  Gao, Z.: Bi-objective urban road transportation discrete network design problem 
under demand and supply uncertainty. In: IEEE International Conference on Automation 
and Logistics, ICAL 2008. IEEE (2008) 

21.  Castillo, E., et al.: The observability problem in traffic models: algebraic and topological 

methods. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 9(2), 275–287 (2008) 

 

