Risk Assessment in Healthcare Collaborative Settings: A 

Case Study Using SHELL 

Pedro Antunes1, Rogerio Bandeira1, Luís Carriço1, Gustavo Zurita2,  

Nelson Baloian3, and Rodrigo Vogt2 

1 University of Lisboa,  

Department of Informatics of the Faculty of Sciences, Campo Grande, Lisboa, Portugal 

{paa,lmc}@di.fc.ul.pt 

2 Universidad de Chile,  

Department of Information System and Management of the Economy and Businesses  

School,, Diagonal Paraguay 257, Santiago de Chile, Chile 

gzurita@ing.puc.cl 

3 Universidad de Chile,  

Department of Computer Science of the Engineering School, Blanco Encalada 2120,  

Santiago de Chile, Chile 
nbaloian@gmail.com 

Abstract.  This  paper  describes  a  case  study  addressing  risk  assessment  in  a 
hospital unit. The objective was to analyse the impact on collaborative work after 
the unit changed their installations. The study adopted the SHELL model. A 
tool  aiming  to  support  the  inquiring  activities  was  also  developed.  The  outcomes 
 of  this  research  show  the  model  is  adequate  to  analyze  the  complex  
issues raised by healthcare collaborative settings. The paper also provides preliminary 
results from the tool use.  

Keywords: SHELL, Risk Assessment, Collaborative Settings, Hospitals. 

1   Introduction 

Risk assessment in healthcare has been maturing over the last years in USA, Britain, 
Europe and Australia [1]. At its origins, the focus was on developing a framework for 
controlling litigation, which has been a major worry for clinicians and hospitals. Studies 
of medical error in healthcare have brought a growing awareness of the scale of 
the problems directly and indirectly causing harm to patients. Risk assessment is also at 
the heart of the concept of clinical governance [2], a management approach making those 
in charge of healthcare organizations accountable for the quality of care delivered.  

Until the 1980s, a major goal of risk assessment was to evaluate the technical and 
human  contributions  to  catastrophic  breakdowns  in  high-hazard  enterprises  such  as 
aviation, nuclear power generation and chemical production [3]. Accidents such as the 
ones that occurred at the Three Mile Island and Chernobyl raised much political and 
social concern. By contrast, medical mishaps tend to affect single individuals and thus 
received less attention. 

R.O. Briggs et al. (Eds.): CRIWG 2008, LNCS 5411, pp. 65–73, 2008. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008 

66 

P. Antunes et al. 

But since the mid-1980s research has begun on the technological and human factors 
affecting the safety of healthcare systems [4]. Much is already known today about 
human  error,  work  environments,  information  overload,  attention  problems,  and  
human-machine interfaces [5]. One outcome of this research is the widespread acceptance 
of the models of causation of accidents [3, 6]. We should expect an increased 
preoccupation with risk assessment as more technological advancements are brought 
into healthcare.  

This paper is related with collaboration technology in two ways. The first one concerns 
 the  highly  technological  and  collaborative  nature  of  hospitals,  since  various 
types of professionals orchestrate their activities in coordinated and concerted ways. 
The collaborative setting is part of the problem when mishaps occur and thus should 
be involved in risk assessment. Research on Computer Supported Collaborative Work 
(CSCW)  may contribute to risk assessment  with insights on collaboration and technology 
use. Secondly, groupware technology may also support risk assessment. I.e., 
technology is not only part of the problem but also may become part of the solutions. 
In this paper we address these two facets of the problem. We illustrate our approach 
to risk assessment in a hospital, analyzing technology changes in a very rich collaborative 
setting: the intermediate care unit for newborns. Our approach is based on the 
Software  –  Hardware  –  Environment  –  Liveware  –  Liveware  (SHELL)  model  [7], 
well known in the human factors field.  

We also discuss a tool  we have been developing to support risk assessment. The 
tool implements gesture-based data management functionality over Tablet-PC, adopting 
the SHELL model to support the interviewers’ activities. The paper is organized 
as follows. In the remaining of this section we give a brief description of the adopted 
model. The section 2 describes the case study. The section 3 is dedicated to the SHELL 
tool. The section 4 discusses the obtained results and provides some conclusions.  

1.1   SHELL 

The  SHELL  model  characterizes  the  socio-technical  context  of  working  environments,
 disentangling the relationships between humans, called liveware (L), and four 
other elements of the working environment [7]: Hardware (H), the physical sources; 
Software (S), including rules, regulations, procedures and practices; Environment (E), 
the physical, economic and social aspects influencing human performance; and liveware 
 (L),  the  other  humans  operating  in  the  working  environment.  This  additional 
liveware  dimension  is  fundamental  to  account  for  the  communication,  coordination 
and collaboration aspects of the working environment.  

The interfaces between the SHELL elements define major areas of analysis: livewareliveware 
 (L-L),  liveware-hardware  (L-H),  liveware-environment  (L-E)  and  livewaresoftware 
 (L-S).  These  interfaces  define  the  underlying  structure  for  risk  assessment. 
SHELL has been extensively applied in manufacturing, nuclear power production, aviation,
  ship  and  railway  operations,  and  maintenance.  Many  aspects  related  with  human 
factors  have  been  analyzed  using  SHELL,  including  requirements  analysis,  safety  assessment,
 psychological issues, accident investigation and human operations.  

Concerning the healthcare sector, the number of studies adopting SHELL is scarce. 
[8]  studied  the  anesthetists’  workload  in  operating  rooms,  with  some  emphasis  on 
collaboration issues such as delegation and supervision. [9] used SHELL to define an 
instrument to evaluate work performance in an intensive care unit. [10] discussed the 

  Risk Assessment in Healthcare Collaborative Settings: A Case Study Using SHELL 

67 

use  of  SHELL  in  developing  a  healthcare  report  system.  None  of  these  projects 
adopted the CSCW perspective to analyze collaboration issues. Therefore, one of the 
major  goals  of  our  research  was  to  evaluate  the  applicability  and  usefulness  of 
SHELL in the CSCW domain.  

2   Case Study 

The study was conducted on a hospital specialized in neonatal and pediatric services – 
Maternidade Alfredo da Costa. The specific target was the intermediate care unit for 
newborns (designated ECU – Especial Care Unit). This unit receives infants unable to 
live  independently,  usually  in  consequence  of  premature  birth  complications,  who 
surpassed the most critical phase and do not require intensive care. Many infants residing 
 in  the  ECU  are  in  incubators,  subject  to  extended  electronic  monitoring  and 
receiving  enriched  oxygen  mixtures,  while  others  stay  in  open  cribs  and  are  essentially 
 gaining  weight.  The  unit  contains  18  incubators  and  13  cribs  and  most  of  the 
time operates very close to that limit (29 to 31 newborns).  

The ECU is a rather complex organization. Besides the diversity of clinical cases 
and  care  services,  the  ECU  involves  multiple  players  with  different  goals,  cultural 
background and attitudes. Besides the clinical staff, the parents are also present during 
long periods (usually between two to six hours a day), apart from the nursing assistants 
 and  secretariat.  The  overall  maneuver  entails  the  collaboration  of  all  players. 
The nurses take one of the principal roles there. They have a constant presence in the 
infants’ rooms. They support the detection on abnormal situations, the containment of 
their consequences and the restoring of the normality. They are also responsible for 
controlling the nursing assistants and interacting with the parents and doctors.  

The  doctors  are  always  available  in  emergency  situations  to  diagnose  problems, 
prescribe treatments and coordinate the nurses’ actions. The parents’ presence is encouraged,
 particularly for the infants that already stay in open cribs. They collaborate 
in  feeding  their  babies,  holding  them,  etc.  The  nursing  assistants  are  essentially  responsible 
for hygiene and fetching and delivering materials.  

The reasons for studying this unit were threefold. First, the unit handles collaboration 
at a reasonable pace that offers good opportunities for external observation. Secondly, it 
has a diversity of players and collaboration requirements. Third, the unit recently suffered 
a complete change of their installations and the hospital administration showed interest in 
assessing their impact. Furthermore, as the new ECU started operating in January 2008, 
the players still remember objectively the details of the antecedent situation.  

The  study  was  based  on  interviews  and  long  visits  to  the  premises  with  several 
stakeholders: hospital administration, unit’s executive board, head of the hospital informatics 
department, unit’s principal nurse and one of the chief doctors.  

2.1   Assessment of the Environmental Changes 

The interviews and visits to the ECU were framed by SHELL. The model provided 
the structure necessary to disentangle many aspects of work in the ECU, elucidating 
the fundamental drives behind the structural changes caused by the new installations. 
In this section we will also rely on the SHELL model to summarize our findings. 

68 

P. Antunes et al. 

The  liveware  elements  (L)  collaborating  in  the  ECU  are  doctors,  nurses,  nursing 
assistants and parents. Most of the work depends on the clinical staff. We found the 
nursing  assistants  are  regarded  quite  distinctively  from  the  other  staff;  presenting  a 
lower level of education, being subject to different management rules and rotating a 
lot  between  units.  The  parents  participate  in  the  process  but  are  mostly  regarded  as 
external entities.  

The  collaboration  depends  on  many  regulations  and  procedures,  as  well  as  practices 
and traditions (S). The most relevant hardware (H) found in the ECU includes 
incubators, medical equipment, and computers. We observed nurses most frequently 
handle this hardware, especially computers,  which are seldom used by doctors. The 
nursing assistants emerge again very distinctively as they operate their own and specific 
equipment.  

All liveware share the same physical environment (E), consisting of several rooms, 
offices  and  corridors.  The  complete  renovation  of  the  ECU  introduced  significant 
changes in this environment. Therefore, (E) should be considered the control variable 
in this study. The following main changes were identified:  

•  New automatic electric doors isolating the ECU from the other units.  
•  The previous infants’ rooms had small windows so their interior could be seen 
from the corridor. Now they have glass walls and are completely visible from 
within the unit. 

•  New automatic electric doors isolating the infants’ rooms from the corridor. In 

the previous condition these doors were permanently kept open. 

•  The unit has an office for the chief nurse and a doctors’ room. In the previous 

conditions these rooms were located far away from the unit.  

•  New  working and cleaning rooms. The incubators previously  serviced in the 

corridor are now serviced in the cleaning room.  

•  As before, the computers are placed in the main corridor. But they are now in 

a different position, facing the corridor and with glass walls behind.  

We  now  discuss  these  changes  according  to  the  areas  of  analysis  proposed  by 

SHELL: 

L-E. The automatic doors contributed to reduce the ambient noise to more comfortable 
levels, with positive impact on the liveware and their activities. It was considered 
that the doors increased the parents’ awareness and care for the work performed in the 
unit,  which lead to a quieter attitude. Furthermore, the  nurses now spend  more time 
working in the infants’ rooms rather than moving immediately to more private premises.
  The  interviewees  found  two  major  reasons  for  this  new  attitude:  the  increased 
quietness  stimulates  the  nurses  to  accomplish  their  tasks  inside  the  infants’  rooms; 
and  the  increased  noise  isolation  refrains  nurses  from  leaving  the  infants’  rooms  
unattended.  

The glass  walls  had a significant impact on the  nurses, as they  now have a clear 
view of the incubators and organize more swiftly their interventions. The nurse office 
and the doctors’ room contributed to the  longer presence  of the principal  nurse and 
the doctors in the unit. The working room was also welcomed, as the previous situation 
was characterized by the unpleasant coexistence of very different functions, such 
as cleaning, eating and writing.  

  Risk Assessment in Healthcare Collaborative Settings: A Case Study Using SHELL 

69 

L-H. The new position of the computers in the main corridor affords working on 
the computer and at the same time controlling the incubators through the glass walls. 
The location of these computers in the previous environment disallowed such level of 
awareness.  

As in the previous setting, the ECU has an emergency incubator located in the end 
of the main corridor. However, since the corridor is much longer now, the doctors are 
considering  the  necessity  to  obtain  a  new  emergency  incubator  to  be  located  in  the 
other end of the corridor, since more time is taken to respond to emergency situations.  

L-L. According to the interviewees, the new ECU supports more structures work, 
more  quietness,  better  awareness,  and  more  fluidity  and  collaboration.  The  nurses 
reported lesser coordination problems and the same level of communication necessary 
to handle emergency situations. The doctors and the principal nurse spend more time 
in  the  unit,  which  was  very  positively  regarded.  There  is  less  conflict  between  the 
nursing assistants and the other staff, because maintenance tasks have been relocated 
from the main corridor to a specialized room. One negative outcome of this new arrangement 
is that by the end of the day, when the staff is reduced, the nursing assistants 
leave the incubators’ rooms unattended.  

L-S. The new environment changed the relationships between staff and rules and 
procedures,  although  more  time  is  necessary  to  detect  more  profound  changes  (the 
new  ECU  was  operating  for  three  months  when  the  interviews  were  done).  One 
change is related with the nursing assistants. Since the rotation of these resources is 
very high and there are strict rules about hygiene, disinfection, etc., there is a constant 
need to instruct the new personnel on those matters. While in the past the instruction 
was done at the corridors, it has now moved to the service room, with positive impact 
on the remaining activities.  

The  outcomes  from  this  study  showed  the  new  working  environment  had  a  very 
positive impact on the unit’s responsiveness and safety. The SHELL model facilitated 
establishing  the  causal  relationships  explaining  the  positive  outcomes  (Figure  1). 
From our point of view, the model served very well the set research goals.  

Fig. 1.  Schematic view of the ECU unit according to the SHELL model 

 

70 

P. Antunes et al. 

3   SHELL Tool 

The  SHELL  tool  aimed  to  facilitate  the  elicitation  of  the  SHELL  model  elements, 
using the touch-screen features and mobility of Tablet-PC. The analysts used the tool 
to record findings during interviews and observations in the hospital. The tool offers 
additional features to those of the pen and paper: the annotations  may be organized 
immediately and there are pen-based editing options making the manipulation of the 
information  more  comfortable.  For  this,  the  SHELL  tool  captures  the  strokes  handwritten 
over the Tablet-PC screen, along with the recognition of predefined gestures 
for triggering edition functions. The tool enables analysts maintaining visual contact 
with the collaborative setting. 

The user-interface consists of a main working screen, where the analyst may take 
notes  about  the  subjects  (liveware).  These  notes  are  recorded  inside  nodes  labeled 
with  the  name  of  the  subjects.  The  nodes  are  represented  by  rectangles  created  by 
gesturing  an  “|_”.  This  gesture  is  automatically  recognized  as  a  node  creation  (see 
Figure 2). The other SHELL model elements are specified inside each node. This is 
done by clicking  with the pen over the node (Figure 2, right side),  which  makes an 
arrow pointing down to appear at the top-left corner. By clicking on that arrow, the 
node  is  “opened-up”  and  the  whole  screen  shows  four  predefined  sub-nodes  corresponding 
to the SHELL elements (figure 3, left side). Each sub-node should be filled 
with the information elicited by the analyst. In this way the “father” node along with 
the  four  “son”  nodes  conform  the  relationships  L-L,  L-S,  L-E,  L-H  over  which  the 
SHELL model is applied. This enables an easy analysis of the collaborative situation. 
When working inside a node, an arrow pointing up is always displayed and serves to 
leave the node (Figure 3, left side). 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 2. creation and selection of a node 

The recursive creation of model elements is not allowed. When entering text in a 
node, if the bottom of the screen is almost reached, then the working area is automatically 
scrolled up to give the user more space to enter information. To scroll up and 
down, a panning mode may be activated using an option in the menu. In this mode, 
gestures  up  and  down  will  scroll  the  working  area  instead  of  writing  a  stroke.  The 
editing  functions are activated by strokes  matching pre-defined gestures having certain 
meanings, for instance: a) a double lace selects all the strokes inside it; b) a cross 
deletes  all  strokes  touched  by  it  or  previously  selected;  c)  selected  objects  may  be 
moved by dragging them; f) a spiral gesture copies the previously selected strokes.  

  Risk Assessment in Healthcare Collaborative Settings: A Case Study Using SHELL 

71 

 

Fig. 3. Left side: The working area related with one interviewed person and the SHELL subnodes.
 Right side: Close-up of the menu. Above menu closed; below menu open. 

3.1   Observations from the Tool Usage in the Case Study 

The preliminary interviews and visits to the hospital  were conducted  with the traditional 
 data  elicitation  tools,  paper  and  pen,  to  avoid  surprise  and  discomfort.  The 
SHELL tool was only introduced in the process when it was considered that a good 
relationship  was established between the analysts and the  interviewees, the goals of 
the study were well established, and the purpose of the tool was understood.  

The  SHELL  tool  was  then  used  as  a  substitute  for  the  paper  and  pen,  usually  
departing  with  empty  pages,  filled  with  hand-scribed  text  as  the  interviews  progressed.
  The  tool  served  to  organize  risk  issues  (problems,  causes  and  effects)  and 
focus  the  interview  on  the  SHELL  elements.  The  data  elicitation  always  departed 
from a specific liveware element – the interviewee –, from where multiple L-L, L-S, 
L-E  and  L-H  relationships  were  established.  After  these  experiments,  two  informal 
interviews were conducted with the tool users. These users were not involved in any 
way in the tool development.  

The  following  observations  were  drawn  from  the  interviews.  The  interviews  and 
visits  usually  took  a  long  time  and  challenged  the  autonomy  of  the  Tablet-PC.  The 
connection of the power plug was not possible most of the times. The tool usage was 
thus accompanied with a discouraging level of stress. The hardware was considered 
more problematic than the software.  

The software was considered simple to learn but not simple to master. Most of the 
problems concern the use of special gestures necessary to organize and edit information.
 Some of the gestures used to manipulate information were similar to the way one 
user was accustomed to write, thus resulting in unintended recognized gestures. Most 
difficulties were related to deleting information since, when it fails, users find an unwelcome 
drawing, which has to be deleted and so the problem is recursive. The failures 
 had  to  be  recovered  in  front  of  the  interviewees,  which  increased  the  stress. 
These  problems  were  somewhat  mitigated  by  having  two  persons  doing  the  interviews,
  being  one  more  focused  on  annotating  and  the  other  on  interacting  with  the 
interviewees. But even in these situations using the tool was regarded as problematic, 
as the user must keep up with the interview.  

72 

P. Antunes et al. 

4   Discussion and Conclusions 

The SHELL model allowed us to obtain very insightful data about the consequences 
of the installation changes done by the target organization. Of course, many of those 
changes  were  intended  by  design.  For  instance,  the  glass  walls  and  the  new  rooms 
were intended by design to improve the ECU’s structure and performance. However, 
as mentioned by the hospital management, there had not been any previous attempt to 
assess if those changes had the expected impact on performance. The results showed a 
remarkable  improvement  in  the  overall  work  structure,  with  positive  impact  on  
performance  (less  coordination  problems)  and  safety  issues  (more  awareness  and 
presence from nurses and doctors).  

The SHELL model allowed us to focus on the fundamental drives of change when 
inquiring  about  the  changes,  and  highlighted  the  causal  relationships  between  the  
installation changes and the  L-E,  L-H, L-L and  L-S  model elements. Therefore one 
outcome from this case study is the very positive role of SHELL elucidating the complexity 
of the collaborative work done in the hospital unit, and the causal relationships 
explaining what occurred after the installation changes. The SHELL model also demonstrated 
 flexibility  and  plasticity  to  the  varied  situations  that  were  encountered  
during this study.  

One curious outcome of this study is that a small number of negative impacts and 
increased  risks  were  found.  Indeed,  only  two  major  issues  were  raised,  one  related 
with the increased distance between the emergency incubator and the infants’ rooms, 
and another related with the lesser availability of the nursing assistants by the end of 
the day.  

We observed that, beyond the changes intended by design, some unexpected consequences 
occurred. For instance, the more presence of nurses in the infants’ rooms 
was not deliberately designed. It just occurred as an indirect consequence of having 
automatic doors separating the ECU and parents assuming a different attitude. From 
our point of view the SHELL model was invaluable pointing out these important consequences 
and the causal relationships explaining them.  

The  SHELL  model  was  also  invaluable  disentangling  the  collaborative  nature  of 
the  work  done  in  the  ECU.  The  model  has  a  strong  focus  on  the  liveware  element, 
which emphasizes the human aspects of the system under evaluation. But the model 
also emphasizes the L-L relationships, which were instrumental to analyze what was 
happening with the collaboration in the work setting. Most of the positive outcomes 
coming  from  this  study  were  related  with  L-L  relationships  (better  work  structure, 
more  awareness,  more  presence,  less  conflicts  between  staff),  indicating  a  positive 
role of SHELL assessing the collaborative setting.   

This research project thus had very positive results. From the hospital management 
point of view, the project was their first opportunity to address risk assessment with a 
focus on collaborative settings. From our point of view, this research was a preliminary 
 step  towards  applying  the  CSCW  view  to  risk  assessment  in  the  healthcare  
domain. 

Currently, our experiments with the SHELL tool served to highlight the possibilities 
and problems of such a kind of tool. The obtained preliminary outcomes showed some 
resistance from the analysts towards using the tool. More work has to be done improving 
 the  functionality  and,  most  importantly,  increasing  the  capability  to  manage  the 

  Risk Assessment in Healthcare Collaborative Settings: A Case Study Using SHELL 

73 

model  in  a  more  comprehensive  (e.g.,  integrating  data  from  multiple  liveware)  and  
collaborative  way  (e.g.,  supporting  multiple  persons  working  on  the  same  model,  a 
functionality currently supported by the tool but that has not yet been experimented).  

 

Acknowledgements.  Special  thanks  to  all  people  at  Maternidade  Alfredo  da  Costa 
who made this research possible. This paper was supported by the Portuguese Foundation 
for Science and Technology (PTDC/EIA/67589/2006) and Fondecyt 1085010. 

References 

1.  Vincent, C.: Clinical Risk Management, Enhancing Patient Safety. BMJ (1995) 
2.  Walshe, K.: The Development of Clinical Risk Management. In: Vincent, C. (ed.) Clinical 

Risk Management, Enhancing Patient Safety, BMJ, London, UK (2001) 

3.  Perrow, C.: Normal Accidents, Living with High-Risk Technologies. Princeton University 

Press, Princeton (1999) 

4.  Leonard,  M.,  Graham,  S.,  Bonacum,  D.:  The  Human  Factor:  The  Critical  Importance  of 
Effective  Teamwork  and  Communication  in  Providing  Safe  Care.  Quality  &  Safety  in 
Health Care 13, 85–90 (2004) 

5.  Redmill, F., Rajan, J.: Human Factors in Safety-Critical Systems, Butterworth Heinemann, 

Oxford, UK (1997) 

6.  Reason,  J.:  Understanding  Adverse  Events:  Human  Factors.  Quality  in  Health  Care 4,  

80–89 (1995) 

7.  Edwards,  E.:  Man  and  Machine:  Systems  for  Safety.  In:  Proceedings  of  British  airline  
pilots  Association  Technical  Symposium.  British  Airline  Pilots  Association,  London, 
pp.21–36 (1972) 

8.  Leedal, J., Smith, A.: Methodological Approaches to Anaesthetists’ Workload in the Operating 
Theatre. British Journal of Anaesthesia 94, 702–709 (2005) 

9.  Helmreich, R., Davies, J.: Human Factors in the Operating Room: Interpersonal Determinants 
of Safety, Efficiency and Morale. Baillière’s Clinical Anaesthesiology 10, 277–295 
(1996) 

10.  Rizzo, M., McEvoy, S.: Medical Safety and Neuroergonomics. In: Parasuraman, R., Rizzo, 

M. (eds.) Neuroergonomics: The Brain at Work. Oxford University Press, Oxford 

 
 

