Issues in Implementing Awareness in Collaborative 

Software for Blind People 

Jaime Sánchez and Nelson Baloian 

Department of Computer Science, University of Chile 
{jsanchez, nbaloian}@dcc.uchile.cl 

Abstract. There is no doubt among the members of the CSCW community that 
awareness is a key issue in the design of successful collaborative software. In 
many systems awareness mechanisms have been implemented through displaying 
graphic information over the system's interface. However, this strategy does 
not apply when the end users of the system are blind people. In this work we 
report the problems  we encountered when implementing a collaborative game 
for supporting the learning of music and sound by blind people when trying to 
develop effective awareness mechanisms. The preliminary results have helped 
us to be "aware" about some characteristics awareness mechanisms should have 
for blind people which are not as prominent and problematic for sighted people.  

1   Introduction 

Many  authors  recognize  that  awareness  is  a  cornerstone  for  designing  effective  collaborative 
software. One of the main goals of awareness is to give relevant information 
to the participants for the completion of a shared task (Gutwin and Greenberg, 1996). 
This has been recognized as a key issue to help participants to shift from working alone 
to working together (Collazos et al., 2002). Borges & Pino (1999) also mention that 
awareness mechanisms are crucial for group interactions.  In another work, Gutwin and 
Greenberg (1996) state the importance of the awareness mechanisms to give up-to-the–
minute knowledge of the situation, since most of the collaborative systems implement 
dynamic  changing  workspaces.  In  most  cases,  the  awareness  information  is  given 
graphically. However, graphical information is obviously not suitable for implementing 
awareness in groupware for blind people. Although there have been many efforts 
made for implementing Computer Supported Learning software for blind people, there 
is almost no information about the development of collaborative software for them. An 
exception is the work reported in (Sánchez et al., 2004) which presents a game involving 
sighted and non-sighted people. However, we think that people with visual disabilities 
can benefit as well as sighted people of this kind of software, not only for learning 
a certain subject matter such as mathematics, geography, and physics but also for developing 
their collaborative skills. In fact, traditional education for people with visual 
disabilities is aimed at developing individual skills only.  

Software for people with visual disabilities tends to transform graphic information 
to a haptic format or audio. AudioDoom (Lumbreras & Sánchez, 1999) allows blind 
children to explore and interact with virtual worlds by using spatial sound. The game 
was based on the traditional Doom  game  where the player moves through corridors 

K. Miesenberger et al. (Eds.): ICCHP 2006, LNCS 4061, pp. 1318 – 1325, 2006. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006 

 

Issues in Implementing Awareness in Collaborative Software for Blind People 

1319 

discovering the environment and solving problems simulated with objects and entities 
that  inhabit  a  virtual  world.  This  proved  that  sound-based  virtual  environments  can 
help to develop tempo-spatial cognitive structures of blind children. Roth et al., 2000 
presents a game for audio concentration. It consists of pairing different levels of geometric 
figures, basic, and derives. They constructed a bi-dimensional sound space to 
represent  geometric  figures  graphically.  This  concept  allows  graphic  representation 
such  as  icons  to  be  represented  by  the  perception  of  moving  sounds  in  the  spatial 
plane.  Morley  et  al.  (1998)  through  the  use  of  non-speech  sounds  in  a  hypermedia 
interface  observed  that  blind  users  developed  special  way  of  navigating  through  a 
known  environment  and  represent  spatial  structure  with  cognitive  difficulty.  VirtualAurea 
(Sánchez, 2002) is a spatial sound tool editor that can be used by parents and 
teachers  to  design  a  wide  variety  of  spatial  maps  such  as  the  inner  structure  of  a 
school, classrooms, corridors, and diverse structures of a house. Users can integrate 
different sounds by associating them to objects and entities in a story. Ressler & Antonishek 
 (2001)  designed  integrated  active  tangible  devices  such  as  forcefeedback 
with a synthetic environment to support collaborative interaction between users. 

Since there  have been very  few developments in collaborative software  for blind 
people  we  refer  to  awareness  issues  developed  by  authors  of  software  for  sighted 
people.  However,  we  think  that  if  the  way  of  implementing  awareness  for  sighted 
people  may  be  not  feasible  for  blind  people,  the  principles  remain  almost  the  same 
especially those referring to the knowledge users need to be able to collaborate in a 
better way. Awareness has been defined as “an understanding of activities of others, 
which provides context for your own activity” (Dourish & Belloti, 1992). It is especially 
 important  to  remember  that  “awareness  is  a  state  of  mind  of  a  user…while 
awareness mechanisms are techniques employed by a system to achieve this state of 
mind” (Sohlenkamp, 1999). 

Examples about how graphical information has been used for implementing awareness 
in CSCW system can be seen at (Gross & Prinz, 2003) and (Moran and Anderson,
  1990).  However,  sound  has  already  been  used  successfully  for  implementing 
awareness in systems for sighted people as reported in (Isaac et al., 2002) and (Cohen, 
1994). 

In this paper we describe software that implements a collaborative game for people 
with  visual  disabilities.  We  focus  the  description  of  this  software  on  problems  we 
found while trying to implement awareness in collaborative software for this type of 
users. We present our preliminary work on the awareness issue for collaborative software 
for blind children by highlighting the “awareness” issue in the community. 

2   Camino Musical (Musical Path) 

In the design of the game participated experts in education of people with visual disabilities.
 They elaborated the metaphor of the game in order to motivate the students. 
The  metaphor  is  inspired  in  the  life  of  Beethoven.  The  scenario  of  the  game  is  the 
year 1826 when the musician suffers a pneumonia which triggers health difficulties. 
The players must help him to keep his music alive and learn about the musician. They 
have to try to reproduce his music with different instruments by recognizing different 
basic  parameters  of  the  sound:  1)  tone,  which  corresponds  to  the  note  of  the  sound 

1320 

J. Sánchez and N. Baloian 

played  by an instrument, 2) duration of the sound 3), volume (high, medium, low), 
and 4) instrument. Thus, the software teaches the user notions of rhythm and musical 
scale. 

The game starts with the participants choosing their instruments. There are a number 
of instruments available and everyone has to choose a different one. If an instrument 
is chosen by one player it cannot be chosen by the others. The rest of the game 
is  divided  in  two  stages  in  which  the  players  have  to  recognize  the  properties  of  a 
sound played by the instrument they have chosen. As they progress recognizing the 
properties  of  the  sounds  listened  (like,  tone,  volume,  and  duration)  they  add  more 
notes to the melody supposed to be reconstructed in order to play it with the rest of 
the group.  They will have to recognize only one property of the sound in the beginning 
and more than one at advanced stages.  

As soon as the instrument responds to questions learners can hear its improvements 
and suggest changes through face-to-face dialogs in the case they are playing in the 
same room. A virtual chat based on voice communication is still not implemented at 
this stage of development.  

The  first  stage  considers  three  types  of  questions:  to  recognize  the  intensity  of 
sound, to recognize the pitch of the sound, and to recognize both parameters simultaneously.
 Sounds in this stage correspond to only one musical note. The second stage 
is conformed of recognizing rhythmic series. The goal in this stage consisted of learners 
to identify time (semibreve, half note, quarter note, and quaver) within a musical 
fragment. While learners recognize figures they have to place them in the corresponding 
order within the composition in such a way that they play in the same order as in 
the example provided.  

At this stage the control panel is conformed of four time figures. They are placed 
on the inner border of the screen. The associated sounds to each figure are the interpretation 
of the figures performed by the selected instrument (by the learner) from the 
beginning of the game. 

3   Awareness Issues in Collaborative Software for Blind People 

The provision of shared virtual spaces is considered a facilitator of diverse processes 
between people that work in groups because it supports externalization that plays an 
important role in the organization and knowledge creation. This implies to support the 
transition  from the tacit and  individual to  the group.  As  we stated above awareness 
mechanisms  mostly  implemented  through  visual  elements  are  not  effective  in  cases 
were  users  are  blind.  In  such  a  case  these  interface  awareness  elements  should  be 
implemented through sounds. 

Our application considers that relevant information for a user concerning the other 
users refers to what instrument others have chosen, in what stage of the software are 
them,  when  a  player  chooses  an  instrument,  and  when  the  player  is  focused  on  to 
perceive.  A  possibility  is  to  provide  sound-based  information  each  time  a  change 
happens, that is, when a player choose an instrument and when passes through another 
stage.  However  audio  information  received  when  state  changes  are  happening  may 
have at least three drawbacks: First, the opportunity of the information. Audio information 
 can  arrive  when  the  player  is  centered  on  to  perceive  other  sounds  then  the 

 

Issues in Implementing Awareness in Collaborative Software for Blind People 

1321 

information can be unnoticed or may alter the work on sound recognition. Second, the 
retention of information. Due to the fact that this information is  volatile it could be 
not correctly retained by the player. Then it could probably happen that even though 
the information is perceived opportunistically by users they may not be able to remind 
it  when  taken  decisions.  Third,  the  validity  of  the  information.  Even  though  the  information 
 arrives  opportunely  and  can  be  retained  its  validity  is  loosing  throughout 
the time because the state of the game is changing. This should be reflected on new 
messages.  This  can  impact  drastically  the  sensation  of  awareness  that  the  user  can 
have.  If  the  user  perceives  that  understand  what  is  happening  to  the  other  players, 
what they have done, in what stage of the software are them, etc.    

Due to the aforementioned reasons the awareness information in this case should 
be given through audio but only when the user requires it to guarantee the opportunity.
  This  information  should  reflect  accurately  what  the  user  needs  to  know  and 
should be short to promote its retention. To do this it is better to have audio information 
(earcon) clear and concise instead of an explanation through voice. Finally, the 
user should ask for the information anytime and it should reflect the up-to-date state. 

In our system the awareness information was implemented in the following way: 
The user can require information about what instruments are in the game (which one 
were selected). To do this he can press a specific keystroke (F1) to receive information 
about each instrument at the time each time a keystroke is pressed. The system 
provides  the  information  in  the  same  order  the  instruments  were  selected  and  in  a 
circular way. The information is a small music piece played by the instrument and its 
name at the end. We do not believe that it is important to know who is behind each 
instrument. To know in what stage is a player of an instrument, first, the player should 
select the instrument following the procedure mentioned and then press F2. After this 
the player receives a piece of music that has been constructed by other player of the 
instrument and the piece of sound that is actually analyzing. 

4   Testing the Software 

4.1   Usability Evaluation 

We implemented diverse usability testing to the collaborative software. Two different 
evaluation methods were applied: usability of interface elements and user acceptance. 
The evaluation was applied five times during six months to 5 legally blind (three with 
residual  vision and two totally blind) learners ages 10 to16, one girl and  four boys, 
from 5th to 8th grade in the School for Blind Learners Santa Lucia, Santiago-Chile.  

The first usability testing was applied to the multimedia resources of the game to 
select sounds and images to be implemented in the software. Learners identified what 
resources  functioned  better  to  and  helped  us  to  design  an  interface  with  icons  that: 
convey meaning, be clear to them, avoid ambiguities, and be attractive. Most instruments 
 and  figures  were  clearly  identified  by  learners.  However  instruments  with 
many details confounded the learners. For instance, the contrabass in some cases was 
recognized as a violin or a guitar. We also had to improve the size of images in the 
interface for learners with residual vision. Bigger size icons and images worked very 

1322 

J. Sánchez and N. Baloian 

well  for them. Colors  were also tested and the best results  were the combination of 
red over yellow and blue over yellow.  

The second usability testing consisted of improving the interfaces of the game and 
polishing  some  deficiencies  for  the  users.  We  applied  usability  questionnaires  with 
questions such as do you like the game?, what instrument is playing on the screen?, 
what colors are you perceiving?, what keyboard strokes do you use and what are their 
purposes?, what do you would change to the game?, do you want to add something 
more to the game?. The third usability evaluation consisted of testing the screen with 
the selection of properties of the sound. For this we used an acceptance questionnaire 
for end-users.  

The  fourth  usability  testing  considered  testing  the  first  stage  of  the  game.  This 
stage consisted of identifying intensities that can be high, medium, and low. They are 
randomly generated by the software. Each time the instrument plays, the learner had 
to  identify  the  intensity  and  a  feedback  is  provided.  After  this  a  new  sound  is  produced 
by the instrument. For this testing we used an acceptance questionnaire for endusers.
 The fifth usability testing consisted of evaluating the interface of the menu for 
selecting instruments and the interfaces for the first and second stage of the game. The 
menu  for  selecting  instruments  contains  two  navigation  buttons  that  allow  moving 
back and forward through the list of instruments. To move through the menu learners 
use left and right arrows. To select the instruments they use the space bar. When moving 
through the menu the next or previous instrument can be shown. A melodic line 
interpreted  by  the  shown  instrument  informs  to  the  blind  player  about  the  type  of 
instrument selected. When doing this a new interpretation of the instrument is played 
and a voice says “you have just selected an instrument”. In the other clients a voice 
informs about the selected instrument. If there are players that have not selected instruments 
the game “waits” until all of them choose an instrument. Meanwhile each 
time players having a selected instrument press a keystroke they are informed about 
the players left to start the game.  

4.2   Results 

Interaction. We evaluated the importance given by learners to learning with the software.
  We  considered  the  following  statements:  “I  will  recommend  the  software  to 
other players”,  “I  have learned  with  the  software”, and  “The software allows  me to 
know new things”.  Blind learners assigned higher scores to the statements showing 
that they value highly the learning of music contents through the interaction with the 
software. The statements related to the use of the software were: “I felt controlling the 
software”, “The software is easy to use” and “The software adapts to my pace”.  At 
the  beginning  learners  assigned  lower  scores  to  this  parameter  evidencing  the  complexities 
 of  user  to  manipulate  and  interact  with  the  software.  However  once  they 
understood the software the quality of the interaction increased. 

Collaborative skills. The last testing included a questionnaire to evaluate the collaborative 
behaviors of learners and how the software helps to reinforce these behaviors. 
The  following  figures  consider  two  basic  aspects  of  collaboration.  Figure  1displays 
positive interdependence through  six  statements  with scores  from 0  to 10 points:  “I 

 

Issues in Implementing Awareness in Collaborative Software for Blind People 

1323 

know clearly the objectives”, “ I know the importance of my role to attain the final 
goal”, “I need to interact with others to attain the final goal”, “The fact that each one 
has  to develop specific  tasks  allow  me to  value the capacities of  my peers”,  “I  feel 
that the achievement of one  of  my peers is the achievement of all of us”, and “The 
audio stimuli given by the software when solved correctly a task makes me feel happy 
even though I was not the one that implemented correctly the action”.  The average 
score  of  learners  with  residual  vision  was  lower  than  the  average  of  blind  learners 
especially in terms of positive interdependence. Blind learners assigned more value to 
positive  interdependence  statements  after  collaborating  with  the  computer-based 
game. 

Figure 2 displays the average of the assigned score to personal and group skills answering 
to the following statements: “I respect the other’s turn”, “I help to my peer 
only when a help is required”, “I give the necessary time to my  peer to answer my 
questions”. “I don’t like that my peer does not answer to what I ask or say”, “I evaluate 
my answers and the one of my peers to learn and understand what is going on in 
the program”.  Learners with residual vision assigned lower scores than blind learners 
to these statements. Blind learners really value personal and group skills as a result of 
interacting with a collaborative computer-based game. 

Scores 

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

High 

Low 

Scores 

10

High 
8

6

4

2

0
Low 

Residual
vision
Blind

 

Residual
v ision

Blind

 

Fig. 1. Positive interdependence 

Fig. 2. Collaborative context 

Awareness.  Two  statements  during  usability  testing  referred  to  awareness  during 
interaction  with  the  game:  I  knew  what  other  players  were  doing  and  I  knew  what 
instrument  had  each  player.  Figure  3  displays  the  results  concerning  the  first  statement.
 Learners had a hard time figuring out what the other players were doing during 
the game. Two players could know “sometimes” what other players were doing and 
three of them definitively knew what other players were doing. 

The results of the second statement are displayed in Figure 4. Three learners could 
“always”  know  what  instrument  had  each  player  and  two  of  them  mentioned  that 
“sometimes”  knew  who  has  what  instrument.  This  is  especially  interesting  because 
they could know the role and instrument of each participant but could not realize what 
the other players were doing. 

1324 

J. Sánchez and N. Baloian 

I knew what other players were doing 

I knew what instrument had each player 

4

3

2

1

0

Alw ays

Sometimes

Never

 

4

3

2

1

0

Alw ays

Sometimes

Never

 

Fig. 3. Awareness of players 

Fig. 4. Awareness of the players’ instruments 

5   Discussion  

This study presents our preliminary work on problems encountered when implementing 
 awareness  in  collaborative  software  for  blind  people.  First,  we  have  designed  a 
collaborative  application  for  learning  music  instruments.  Second,  we  have  usability 
tested the software with five learners evaluating the interfaces for both interaction and 
collaboration.  Third,  we  have  identified  some  unique  problems  in  implementing 
awareness in collaborative software for blind learners.  

Blind users interacted with the software, recommended improvements in the interfaces 
 and  highly  accepted  the  interfaces  probably  because  they  mapped  well  their 
mental models. During usability we asked them about their knowledge about what the 
other players were doing but they could not figure out their tasks even though most of 
them could realize what music instrument had each player. We believe that this behavior 
can be explained because either the statement was not completely understood 
or the awareness mechanisms were not correctly implemented in the software.  

Our  preliminary  results  confirm  our  hypothesis  about  implementing  awareness 
mechanisms in software for blind people. Implementing awareness for this people is 
not a trivial task. We need more testing to determine which one of the problems stated 
earlier in this paper, such as opportunity, retention, and validity should be approached 
differently in order to better fit the requirements of blind  people. Our initial data is 
telling  us  that  principles  of  identifying  and  implementing  key  awareness  issues  for 
sighted  people  should  be  taken  into  account  but  should  not  be  transferred  directly 
when  implementing  awareness  mechanisms  for  people  with  visual  disabilities. 
Awareness mechanisms for these people imply more complex problems that must be 
considered when designing collaborative software for them.  

The next task is to fully understand the awareness needs of blind people when collaborating 
through virtual environments. We hope to achieve this by developing more 
collaborative applications and testing the awareness mechanisms we use. Especially, 
we have to investigate about the feeling users have about what is going on in the collaborative 
game and how do they use the information provided. 

Acknowledgment  

This  report  was  funded  by  the  Chilean  National  Fund  of  Science  and  Technology, 
Fondecyt, Project 1030158. 

 

Issues in Implementing Awareness in Collaborative Software for Blind People 

1325 

References 

1.  Borges,  M.,  Pino,  J.  (1999).:  Awareness  mechanisms  for  coordination  in  asynchronous 

CSCW. Proc. Of the WITS’99 Conf. Charlotte, North Carolina, Dec 1999, pp. 69-74 

2.  Cohen,  J.  (1994).:  Monitoring  background  activities.  In  G.  Kramer  (Ed.),  Auditory  dis-
play: Sonification, audification, and auditory interfaces. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 
pp. 499-522 

3.  Collazos,  C.  Guerrero,  L.  Pino,  J.  Ochoa,  S.  (2002):  Introducing  shared-knowledge 
Awareness. Proceedings of the IASTED Conference Information and knowledge sharing. 
Nov. 2002, St Thomas, Virgin Islands, pp. 13-18 

4.  Dourish,  P.  Belloti  V.  (1992):  Awareness  and  coordination  in  shared  workspaces.  Proceedings 
of CSCW’92, pp. 107-114 

5.  Gross, T., Prinz, W. (2003): Awareness in Context: A Light-Weight Approach, Proceedings 
of the European Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work (E-CSCW), 
Helsinki, Finland, Sept. 2003, pp. 295-314  

6.  Gutwin, C. and S. Greenberg (1996): Workspace Awareness for Groupware. Proceedings 

of the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. Vancouver, pp. 208–209 

7.  Isaacs,  E.,  Walendowski,  A.  and  Ranganathan,  D.:  (2002)  Hubbub:  A  sound-enhanced 
mobile instant messenger that supports awareness and opportunistic interactions. Proceedings 
 of  the  Conference  Computer-Human  Interaction  (CHI),  Minneapolis,  MN,  April, 
2002, pp. 179-186 

8.  Lumbreras, M., & Sánchez, J. (1999): Interactive 3D Sound Hyperstories for Blind Children.
 Proceedings of the ACM CHI ‘99, Pittsburg PA, USA (1999), pp. 318-325 

9.  Moran, T., Anderson, J. (1990): The workaday World as a paradigm for CSCW Design. 

Proceedings of CSCW ’90. October 1990, pp. 381-393 

10.  Morley,  S.,  Petrie,  H.,  O’Neill  A.-M.  &  McNally,  P.  (1998):  The  use  of  non-speech 
sounds  in  a  hypermedia  interface  for  blind  users,  in  Edwards,  A.D.N.,  Arato,  A.,  and 
Zagler,  W.L.(Eds.)’Computers  and  Assistive  Technology’.  Proceedings  of  ICCHP’98. 
XV, IFIP World Computer Congress, pp. 205-214 

11.  Ressler, S. & Antonishek, B. (2001): Integrating Active Tangible Devices with a Synthetic 
Environment for Collaborative Engineering. Proceedings of the 2001 Web3D Symposium. 
Paderborn, Germany, February 19-22, pp. 93-100 

12.  Roth,  P.,  Petrucci,  L.,  Assimacopoulos,  A.  &  Pun,  Th.  (2000):  Concentration  Game,  an 
Audio Adaptation for the blind. CSUN 2000 Conference Proceedings, Los Angeles, USA, 
pp. 1-4 

13.  Sánchez,  J.  (2002).  VirtualAurea:  Perception  through  spatialized  sound.  Proceedings  of 
the 4th International Conference on Disability, Virtual Reality and Associated Technologies,
 September 18-20, 2002,Veszprém, Hungary, pp. 67-73 

14.  Sánchez,  J.,  Baloian,  N.  &  Hassler,  T.  (2004).  Blind  to  Sighted  Children  Interaction 
through  Collaborative  Environments.  Proceedings  of  the  CRIWG  ´04.  Lecture  Notes  in 
Computer Science 3198, Springer-Verlag, pp. 192-205 

15.  Sohlenkamp, M. Supporting group awareness in Multi-user environments through perceptualization.
 GMD research series No. 6 (1999), 172 pp 

