Inf Syst Front (2016) 18:7–21
DOI 10.1007/s10796-015-9573-2

Understanding student participation in undergraduate course
communities: A case study

Francisco J. Gutierrez 1 & Sergio F. Ochoa 1 & Gustavo Zurita 2 & Nelson Baloian 1

Published online: 12 June 2015
# Springer Science+Business Media New York 2015

Abstract Participation is the cornerstone of any community.
 Promoting, understanding and properly managing it
allows not only keeping the community sustainable, but
also providing personalized services to its members and
managers. This article presents a case study in which
student participation in a course community was motivated 
using two different extrinsic mechanisms, and mediated 
by a software platform. The results were compared 
with a baseline community of the same course,
in which participation was not motivated by external
means. The analysis of these results indicates that managing 
a partially virtual course community requires the
introduction of monitoring services, community managers 
and extrinsic mechanisms to motivate participation.
 These findings allow community managers to improve 
their capability for promoting participation and
keeping the community sustainable. The findings also
raise several
implications that should be considered in
the design of software supporting this kind of community,
 when managing the participation of its members.

* Francisco J. Gutierrez
frgutier@dcc.uchile.cl

Sergio F. Ochoa
sochoa@dcc.uchile.cl

Gustavo Zurita
gzurita@fen.uchile.cl

Nelson Baloian
nbaloian@dcc.uchile.cl

1 Computer Science Department, Universidad de Chile, Beauchef 851,

3rd floor, Santiago, Chile

2 Management and Information Systems Department, Universidad de

Chile, Diagonal Paraguay 257, Santiago, Chile

Keywords Socio-technical analysis . Partially virtual
communities . Community structure . Undergraduate course
communities . User interaction patterns

1 Introduction

Social computing has become a transversal issue that affects
not only collaborative systems, but also information systems
in general. The relevance of considering socio-technical aspects 
in the design of these systems has been highlighted by
their users, the scientific community and the industry (Baxter
and Sommerville 2011; Grudin 1994; Oinas-Kukkonen et al.
2011; Patnayakuni and Ruppel 2010; Wang et al. 2007;
Whitworth and Ahmad 2013). Several previous studies indicate 
that adding social interaction capabilities to information
systems can improve user experience and performance (Barjis
et al. 2011; Choi et al. 2013; Shami et al. 2014; Wang 2011;
Yang et al. 2012), and also the suitability of the services provided 
by these systems (Geyer et al. 2011; Grgecic and
Rosenkranz 2010; Hovorka and Larsen 2005; Shami et al.
2011; Zhang et al. 2010). However, embedding social interaction 
services in information systems requires a paradigm shift,
not only in the way in which software applications are perceived 
by users, but also in the type of support provided to
users’ activities.

The suitability of these services affects user participation,
which is the cornerstone of any community (Leimeister et al.
2006; Preece 2001). A wrong intervention on the supporting
system could negatively impact on the users’ participation,
thus damaging the community, and even destroying it
(Gutierrez et al. 2012a).

User participation is a temporal variable, and its value depends 
on how well-aligned are the services provided by the
supporting system and the users’ interests and needs. In order

8

Inf Syst Front (2016) 18:7–21

to keep the community in a sustainable condition and react ontime 
in case of need, this variable could be monitored and
eventually controlled by community managers. Social services 
can be added or removed to try dealing with the users’
needs, and thus improve their participation. Following the
same goal, the participation strategy can be adjusted or periodically 
redefined by the community managers. Therefore,
these managers must be aware of the community status, and
eventual changes in its behavior, before taking any action.

The main challenges to keep user participation under control 
in a community are two: (1) determine how healthy is
currently the people participation, in terms of volume and
quality of contributions, alongside the community lifecycle
(Iriberri and Leroy 2009); and (2) identify suitable strategies
to positively impact such participation (Preece and
Shneiderman 2009).

This article reports a case study, in which student participation 
in an undergraduate course community was intervened
using extrinsic mechanisms. The main goal was to see the
impact that these interventions have in the community mem-
bers’ behavior. The consequences of these interventions can
be identified and monitored by analyzing the community
structure. Therefore, community managers can use this mechanism 
to monitor the community before and after an intervention.
 This can also be used to detect changes in the behavior of
community members. These results help designers to address
the first challenge (i.e., diagnose the participation of community 
members) and suggest strategies to deal with the second
one (i.e., positively impact member participation).

During the study, students of three sections of an undergraduate 
course community were exposed (through the use of
a learning platform) to different participation strategies. Each
course section represents a partially virtual community (PVC).
In these PVCs, members typically know each other and have
the opportunity to interact among them through both, a virtual
and a physical space in order to help reach an individual or
common goal (Gutierrez et al. 2012b).

The first course community did not use a predefined strategy 
to promote participation; i.e., community members did
not receive any external motivation to contribute with others
using the platform. This community was used as the control
group, since its general behavior adheres to what designers
would expect (in terms of participation) when there is no intervention.
 The second community promoted the quantity of
student contributions, and the third one promoted quality over
quantity. All studied communities were partially virtual and
comparable among them.

We monitored student participation in these communities
during 15 weeks. The results show that keeping a permanent
monitoring of the community structure and activity is almost
mandatory, if participation is meant to be kept under control.
The results also show that participation in these communities
should be motivated using extrinsic reinforcements, such as

social recognition, prestige or visibility of member contributions.
 Based on the obtained findings, we raise a number of
implications to design community supporting platforms, considering 
the needs of both, community managers and
members.

Next section reviews the related work. Section 3 describes
the case study, the strategies used to promote participation,
and the metrics used to analyze the community structure. Section 
4 presents and discusses the obtained results. Section 5 is
dedicated to show the implications to design derived from the
study. Finally, section 6 presents the conclusions and further
work.

2 Related work

Partially virtual and online communities need to count on a
software platform that eases and promotes the participation of
their members, and allows their managers to diagnose and
intervene the community. Therefore, the supporting platform
should address various design aspects in order to allow
smooth interaction among community members, as well as
to monitor and intervene the community by their managers.
Next sections discuss the related work in these areas, particularly 
focused on student communities.

2.1 Supporting computer-mediated interaction in PVCs

The software supporting these communities must ease the
interaction among their members; therefore their services
should be aligned with the users’ needs. Provided these needs
evolve with the time, the platform should also evolve to fit the
new needs of the users.

Many community supporting platforms embed asynchronous 
interaction tools (e.g., discussion boards), because they
provide flexibility and effectiveness to the interactions among
community members; particularly in educational scenarios
(Hammond 2005). Researchers and instructors claim that discussion 
boards reinforce the learning experience by increasing
student commitment in their courses, resulting therefore in
significantly better results (Martyn 2005; Davies and Graff
2003; Ochoa et al. 2012). Vonderwell and Zachariah (2005)
found that technology, user interface design, content-area experience,
 roles and tasks, and information overload, influence
the students’ participation and interaction patterns.

Schummer and Lukosch (2007) propose a set of patterns
that should be considered when designing tools for supporting
computer-mediated interactions. These patterns involve
community and group support, which can be used by
software designers as guidelines for conceiving and
modeling new community supporting platforms. Similarly,
Gutierrez et al. proposed a reference architecture (2014) for
assisting the modeling of such systems, based on the authors’

Inf Syst Front (2016) 18:7–21

9

experience designing and developing software platforms to
support partially virtual communities. Typically, software architects 
and designers need to make design decisions in three
criteria: (1) elements that will shape user identity in the community,
 (2) interaction mechanisms to be used for engaging
community members and fostering participation, and (3) the
structural sustain of the community in terms of motivation,
governance and metaphors. Furthermore, when trying to involve 
physical members into virtual participation, it turns crucial 
to embed appropriate synchronous and asynchronous
communication mechanisms (Neyem et al. 2011), conceive
strategies for facilitating physical encounters (Herskovic
et al. 2012; Westerlund et al. 2009), and provide efficient
community awareness to its members (Acquisti and Gross
2006). Particularly, Antunes et al. (2014) provide a checklist
of awareness mechanisms suitable for the development of
collaborative applications.

All of these research works represent meaningful guidelines,
 which are potentially useful depending on the community 
current status (e.g., its level of maturity, stage in its
lifecycle, and closeness of its members) at the moment to
deploy these services to its members. Therefore, the community 
status should be captured and understood by the managers,
 before deciding to deploy a service into the supporting
platform.

2.2 Determining the status of a PVCs

There is consensus that the current status of an online or partially 
virtual community can be captured by analyzing its
structure and activity through time (Rowe and Alani 2012;
Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al. 2013). Social scientists have
historically used techniques from social network analysis to
identify the underlying interaction patterns that emerge from a
community (Wasserman and Faust 1994); and based on that, it
is possible to diagnose the community current status. These
interaction patterns also allow us to understand the impact of
such social structures on other variables (Wellman 1996).

Social network analysis manages social relationships in
terms of network theory; therefore, it models individual actors
within the network as nodes, and the relationships between
them as ties. Therefore, course communities can be understood 
as graphs where the students represent the nodes and
the edges indicate the relationship among nodes. In the particular 
case of learning communities, several approaches for social 
network analysis have been successfully used to understand 
participation and interaction aspects during learning processes 
(Harrer et al. 2007; de Laat et al. 2007; Martinez et al.
2006; Reffay et al. 2011).

Provided that the structure and interaction in a community
are represented by a graph, several metrics can be used to
characterize and study them; for instance: degrees, centrality,
density, clustering, cliques, and cohesion (Scott 2012). For

diagnosing, it is important to detect network motifs, which
are defined as recurrent and statistically significant subgraphs 
(or patterns) that are present in the graph. Although
network motifs help provide a deep insight into the network
functional abilities, their detection is computationally challenging 
(Kashtan et al. 2004). Therefore, it is important to
count on a visual representation of this information, in order
to understand the network data and convey the result of the
analysis (D’Andrea et al. 2009). These visual representations
also allow managers to not only diagnose member participation,
 but also analyze its evolution over time.

2.3 Promoting participation in PVCs

Regulating the quality and quantity of user contributions, and
therefore ensuring a sustainable level of user participation in
an online community, requires an adaptation of the participant
rewards for particular forms of participation, depending on the
user reputation and the current needs of the community
(Cheng and Vassileva 2006). In general terms, the problem
of encouraging participation in online communities has been
observed mainly from a social psychology point of view. For
example, Cheng and Vassileva (2005) proposed a motivation
strategy based on persuasion, in order to reinforce the value of
quantity and quality in user contributions. Harper et al. (2007)
studied the effects of social comparisons (i.e., displaying how
community members can compare to others in the system,
e.g., in terms of performance, participation and interaction).
Janzik and Herstatt (2008) proposed a set of incentives to
motivate community members (using peer recognition, status,
reputation, and identification). Current alternatives to encourage 
participation involve the use of gamification (Zichermann
and Cunningham 2011); i.e., game mechanics into the design
of non-game contexts to increase users’ self-contributions
(Hamari et al. 2014; Herzig et al. 2012; Kapp 2012). These
works provide an overview on how participation can be
modeled and structurally considered as a key component in
the basic definition of the community.

Preece and Shneiderman (2009) followed user life cycles
through their evolution in a community and listed strategies
for motivating their participation according to their evolving
role within the group. Gutierrez et al. (2011) proposed a
framework for motivating user participation based on intrinsic
motivation, which included several strategies such as
displaying rankings, proposing challenges, and displaying
feedback.

Several authors (Butler 2001; Kim 2000; Raban et al.
2010) claim that communities have to achieve a certain critical
mass, i.e., a minimum number of users in order to sustain
activity and information exchanges within the group.
Dabbish et al. (2012) studied the effects of turnover in online
communities, i.e., the dynamics of user entrance and exiting in
a particular group. In online and partially virtual communities,

10

Inf Syst Front (2016) 18:7–21

both participation and member commitment tend to increase
when there is a noticeable turnover. This is translated into
group members understanding the community activity as a
dynamic entity, whereas turnover affects information exchange 
and content generation within the group. In some communities,
 it is more important for its sustainability to achieve a
critical mass of contributions rather than a critical mass of
users.

This know-how about participation and promotion helps
managers to choose candidate strategies for intervene the
community when needed, but they do not ensure the result
or the way in which the community is going to react to this
intervention. Therefore, managers should also monitor the
community structure and evolution to see if the intervention
impacted the community in the expected way. Therefore,
 providing monitoring and diagnosing capabilities
to community managers is mandatory for the supporting
platforms.

While the design of online community supporting systems
has been widely explored in the literature, little attention has
been devoted to understand the underlying participation
mechanisms and design concerns aimed to support PVCs.
For instance, Schummer and Lukosch (2007) define a pattern
language for computer-mediated interaction that can be used
to design several aspects of community support, such as user
identification, contacts, and mechanisms for reciprocity and
rewards among community members. However, PVCs are
particular socio-technical constructs, in which it is needed to
explicitly support the physical interactions that are required by
their members (Gutierrez et al. 2014).

In the present article, we aim to extend the current research
literature in online communities by presenting the findings of
a case study that explores the implications of quality and
quantity of contributions in participation strategies. PVCs
are a particular case of online communities, where the main
concerns of physical (i.e., as how they are understood in psychology 
and sociology) and virtual communities (i.e., as how
they are understood in human-computer interaction and
computer-mediated communication) need to be considered.

3 Methodology

We conducted a case study aiming to understand how student
participation impact the interaction patterns in a partially virtual 
course community. The following subsections detail the
study settings and a description of the collected data.

3.1 Settings

The study scenarios involved three communities of third-year
undergraduate students enrolled in an information technology
course offered by the Information Systems Department at the

Business School of the University of Chile. The three groups
were independent among them and each intervention lasted
15 weeks (one regular course semester). Students knew each
other beforehand in their particular community. In each scenario 
we put in service a dedicated online discussion board,
which runs on the learning platform that students regularly use
to support their activities.

Scenario 0 served as control group, in which we did not
neither motivate nor control participation. Scenarios 1 and 2
served as experimental groups, in which the dependent variable 
is the strategy used to motivate participation in each case.
All of the students participating in the study were affected to
one and only one scenario. The three scenarios are characterized 
as follows:

&

&

&

Scenario 0. This community was composed of 41 students,
 where 20 of them were men and 21 were women.
Scenario 1. This community was composed of 30 students,
 where 16 of them were men and 14 were women.
Scenario 2. This community was composed of 42 students,
 where 19 of them were men and 23 were women.

The instructional team was the same for the three sections
of this course (i.e., for the three communities). Before the
intervention, the course instructors agreed the instructional
approach to be used, and also the number and type of assignments 
to be given to students, making thus comparable the
study scenarios.

The discussion board supporting each course community
allows students to publish new topics, reply to others’ contributions,
 and receive notifications concerning user availability
and recent activity. In order to ensure the usage of the software
platform, students of each scenario were asked to publish at
least one contribution every 2 weeks, related to the topics
covered in the lecture sessions. These contributions were
based on recent news found in diverse media and had to include 
a personal opinion elaborated by the student prior to
publication. Once this contribution is made available in the
software platform, other students had the chance to rate the
article (according to their own perception on quality and per-
tinence) and comment on it. It is important to note that ratings
could only be made after a student commented on the contribution 
in order to address typical free riding situations. Furthermore,
 in order to limit the influence of student personality
issues (e.g., peer pressure, shyness and peer identification) on
the interaction network structure and user activity, participation 
was remained anonymous as opposed to traditional activity 
patterns in online discussion boards. Student participation
and interaction in the online discussion boards was monitored
by a teaching assistant, but only in a role of observer.

The design of the discussion board in this case study encourages 
participation through extrinsic mechanisms. The embedded 
motivation strategies are grounded in the research

Inf Syst Front (2016) 18:7–21

11

conducted by Cheng and Vassileva (2006), which have shown
to be effective for designing sustainable online communities
in educational scenarios. Some of the used design mechanisms 
include: explicit labels and participation indicators for
displaying the level activity of different members; call-toaction 
triggers due to group dissimilarity and peer ratings;
the establishments of participation goals; and gamificationbased 
incentives (Zichermann and Cunningham 2011), such
as ranking stars.

The discussion board used different algorithms to calculate
user participation in scenarios 1 and 2. In the former, participation 
was calculated based on the number of students’ contributions,
 and in the latter, such a metric was focused on the
quality of contributions. An indicator showing this metric was
visible in the user interface of the tool, and it was also used to
rank the students according to their participation (Fig. 1). Scenario 
0 served as baseline, where we did not include a participation 
metric nor a visible indicator to students about their
current activity.

The user interface is divided into two modules: (1) a main
page where users can read the different contributions published 
in the site, and (2) a detailed view of one of these
contributions. The first module displays a list of the 10 most
recent contributions, a tag cloud and a panel of links pointing
to other articles classified by categories and relevant tags
(Fig. 1). This element, alongside with the search bar, helps
users identify and find relevant documents, facilitating thus
the interaction between the author and the reader. Users can
access to the detailed view of any contribution by either

clicking on its title, content, or dedicated icon at the bottom
of the box. Other articles can be found by navigating through
different pages at the bottom of the site.

The detailed view of each contribution displays the complete 
text (citing the source from where it was taken), the
personal opinion of the author regarding the content of the
article, and a list of reactions made to the contribution by other
students (Fig. 2). Once a student publishes a comment linked
to a particular contribution, the system proposes a rating system 
for grading the perceived quality of the article on a scale
of one to seven stars. We chose to set this metaphor, since
students are graded in a similar way in their regular courses
at the University. Ratings and voting options were available
and visible on the user interface, only for students participating 
in scenarios 1 and 2.

During the 15 weeks in which this tool was used, three
milestones were established for gathering traffic data from
each site. The milestones were roughly placed every 5 weeks
in order to make results comparable not only between communities,
 but also to analyze the evolution of the interaction
patterns over time.

In each milestone, we identified: (1) the number of published 
contributions of each student in the discussion board;
(2) the number of comments to other articles made by each
student; and (3) the number of comments received by the other
students.

With these values, in the case of scenarios 1 and 2, we
computed a participation metric for each student, according
to the strategy used in each situation. For these scenarios, we

Fig. 1 User interface of the
online discussion board

12

Fig. 2 Detailed view of the user
interface for comments

Inf Syst Front (2016) 18:7–21

also computed the perceived quality of each contribution by
the other students in the community.

The user interface for students belonging to scenarios 1 and
2 showed their participation value every time they logged in.
This value and the corresponding label that situated each student 
within the community could be checked on demand. We
classified students in three categories: Bhigh participation^
(top 20 % of the whole group), Blow participation^ (bottom
20 % of the group), and Bmedium participation^. The
maximum and minimum values to set up the three categories 
were calculated in real-time. At each milestone,
we published the participation values for all students
and we reinitialized the counters for all metrics. The
detailed results of the participation metrics obtained in
these two cases, at each milestone, are presented and
discussed in (Gutierrez et al. 2013).

The obtained results help explain the influence of participation 
strategies in user activity under the presented intervention 
context (i.e., small undergraduate course communities,
interacting mainly through an online discussion board). In
particular, we acknowledge that user behavior depends on
several other variables, whose study goes far beyond the scope
of this article. Therefore, we report the obtained results in
scenarios 1 and 2 with regard to the activity registered in
scenarios 0, which serves as baseline.

3.2 Measuring user participation

participation metric for each student, and for encouraging interaction 
with other course members.

We computed a participation function with the values gathered 
in each milestone, considering the number of published
articles (A), perceived quality of the contributions (Q), number 
of published comments to other students (PC), and number 
of received comments from other students (RC).

In scenario 1, we highlighted the quantity of contributions
rather than the quality of them. With this strategy, our aim was
for students to increase the number of contributions in time.
Considering these four metrics, we computed the value of
participation (P) for the first community as follows:
P ¼ A þ PC

ð1Þ

In this case, the participation value is a function of the
number of published articles and the published comments to
other students. We purposely did not consider in Eq. 1 the
value of received comments and the perceived quality of the
contributions by other students.

On the other hand, scenario 2 also included quality as a
dimension of how participation is measured. With this strategy,
 we also aimed to increase the number of contributions, but
also to improve the perceived quality of them by the other
community members. In this case, we computed the value of
participation (P) as follows:
P ¼ A*Q=2 þ RC

ð2Þ

Communities in scenarios 1 and 2 were intervened to use a
particular participation strategy to motivate and rate student
contributions. As a design decision, students could not directly 
reply to one of their own contributions. This was intended
for avoiding self-referencing when computing the

In this case, the participation value stresses the quality of
the contributions, since those that are perceived as more
Buseful^ or Bpertinent^ by other members, will weigh more
in the participation value of a student. In Eq. 2 we have also
considered the number of received comments instead of the

Inf Syst Front (2016) 18:7–21

13

published ones. This was done for two reasons: (1) students
will tend to comment on those articles that they find interesting 
or useful, therefore they might be of better quality; and (2)
when a student posts a comment on the contribution of another 
student, s/he helps increase the other’s participation value
instead of his/her own.

Following the intervention conditions detailed in the previous 
section, participation in scenario 0 was not manipulated
using any external mechanism.

3.3 Relevant network metrics to analyze

We modeled the interaction network as a weighted directed
graph where the nodes are the students, and the edges between
nodes represent the number and direction of comments that
one student published to another. Figure 3 shows an example
of the network representation. Alice, Bob and Charlie are students 
in the course and published at least one article each.
Alice posted three comments to Bob, Bob commented four
articles written by Charlie, but Charlie only returned one comment 
to Bob. The arrow size indicates the cardinality of the
relationship in that direction.

In order to understand the interaction network, we analyzed

these interactions considering the following metrics:

&

Indegree: This metric represents the number of edges that
arrive to a given node. It can be understood as the number
of students who write to a particular node.

& Weighted indegree: This indicates the number of edges
that arrive to a given node, weighted by the number of
comments. This metric can be understood as the number
of comments that a given student receives.

& Outdegree: This metric shows the number of edges that
emerge from a given node. It can be understood as the
number of students that a particular node is writing to.

& Weighted outdegree: This represents the number of edges
that emerge from a given node, weighted by the number of
comments. It represents the number of comments that a
student posts in the community.

Fig. 3 Example of an interaction network

& Average path length: This metric corresponds to the average 
number of hops along the shortest paths for all possible 
pair of nodes in the interaction network. It represents
the average number of students that are linked within a
chain of contributions.

& Diameter: This metric indicates the greatest distance between 
any pair of nodes in the interaction network. It corresponds 
to the maximum value for the path length; i.e., it
represents the largest chain of contributions among
students.

& Density: This metric indicates the number of connected
edges with regard to the total number of edges. In other
words, it represents how many authors have interacted
with each other, out of the total number of links possible.
& Modularity: This is a factor between −0.5 and 1.0 that
reflects the division of the network into groups within
which the network connections are dense, but between
which they are sparser. If this value is positive, the number
of edges within groups exceeds the number expected on
the basis of chance. When this value approaches 1, it
means the strength of division of a graph structure is high
(e.g., clear and distinct groups within the community).

& Number of nodes: This metric indicates the number of

people participating in the community.

& Number of edges: This indicates the number of links between 
nodes considering both, the edges arriving to and
emerging from the nodes.

Finally, we analyze the different triads that coexist within
the network in the form of 3-node motifs. There are 13 different 
isomorphic 3-node motifs, and they are presented in Fig. 4.
It is worth pointing out that among these motifs, seven of them
are complete (or partially complete), since they tend to form
cliques (i.e., a subset of three nodes in a graph, such that every
two nodes in the subset are connected by an edge). On the
other hand, six of the motifs are partially incomplete, since
two nodes remain unconnected given that there is no interaction 
between them.

4 Analysis of results

This section reports the main results obtained after analyzing
participation metrics and the interaction network structure of
the three scenarios used in the study. For analyzing and visualizing 
the interaction networks, we used the software Gephi
v.0.8.

We first analyze the main participation metrics defined in
section 3, and then we show the main metrics of the graph
structure. Later, we identify and quantify the different 3-node
motifs that compose the structure of each network. Finally, we
comparatively discuss the results obtained in each scenario 
to better understand how the different participation

14

Fig. 4 Isomorphic 3-node motifs

Inf Syst Front (2016) 18:7–21

interaction networks, and
the interaction patterns among students in their

the several

strategies affect
hence,
respective communities.

4.1 Participation metrics

Table 1 presents the relative number of articles and comments
published in each scenario, with regard to the total number of
students in each case.

We note that user participation in the baseline scenario is
smaller than participation in scenarios 1 and 2. This is quite
probably due to the introduction of an explicit strategy for
triggering user activity and interaction among users in the
intervened scenarios. Furthermore, the average number of
published articles in scenario 2 was lower than in scenario 1,
which is also a result that we can expect, since creating good
quality contributions requires more effort than just doing a
contribution.

Finally, the average rate of comments per article is also
greater in scenario 2 than in scenario 1. This can be explained
because we induced a quality factor in the participation strategy,
 and this could have triggered more interest to generate
better and more appealing contributions. Nevertheless, in

Table 1

Participation metrics

Scenario 0
(Baseline)

Scenario 1
(Eq. 1)

Scenario 2
(Eq. 2)

Articles per user
Comments per user
Comments per article

6.94
0.45
0.06

9.96
24.65
2.12

7.59
19.17
3.09

order to properly conclude this fact, we need to carry on further 
research regarding this situation.

4.2 Analysis of the network structure

Even if we continuously monitored student interaction independently 
in each community throughout the observation period 
(i.e., 15 weeks – a regular semester course), we analyzed
their network structure in three milestones placed every
5 weeks. The reason behind this decision was to dispose of
enough data to compare between two observations for tracking 
the network structure evolution through time. However,
while we found differences regarding the volume of participation 
in terms of number and quality of contributions, we did
not detect statistically significant differences in the network
structure within each community (Gutierrez et al. 2013).
Table 2 presents the interaction network metrics for each study

Table 2 Network metrics

Scenario 0
(Baseline)

Scenario 1
(Eq. 1)

Scenario 2
(Eq. 2)

Number of nodes
Number of edges
Density
Average degree
Average weighted degree
Average path length
Diameter
Modularity

41
17
0.01
0.33
0.45
2.15
4
0.34

30
547
0.63
18.23
82.20
1.30
2
0.11

42
819
0.48
21.23
55.10
1.53
3
0.25

Inf Syst Front (2016) 18:7–21

15

scenario, taken once the activity in each scenario formally
ceased (i.e., at the end of the semester).

Aiming to identify statistically significant differences in the
values measured for characterizing the network structure, we
conducted pairwise Wilcoxon tests. Given that the measured
data do not follow a normal distribution (formally verified
conducting Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests of data against the
normal distribution), the assumptions for applying parametric
tests do not hold.

In scenarios 1 and 2 the number of edges, density, average
degree (i.e., the mean number of students that are connected
through comments) and average weighted degree (i.e., the
mean number of published comments in the platform) are
significantly greater (p<0.001) than in the baseline scenario.
This can be explained due to the existence of a particular
participation strategy motivating the interaction among users
in the community (i.e., an extrinsic reward (Tedjamulia et al.
2005)). In order to be sure about this assumption, we verified
the impact that the gender has in the participation rate. We
found no statistically significant differences between the number 
of contributions of male and female students; therefore,
such an effect can only be explained by the existence of an
extrinsic rewards in scenarios 1 and 2.

Moreover, the average weighted degree in scenario 1 is
significantly greater than in scenario 2 (p<0.05). This can be
understood as a consequence of a Bsnowball effect^, since the
goal of the participation strategy in scenario 1 was merely to
increase the number of contributions in the community. Therefore,
 the perceived measure of success is linked to the number
of contributions published by the students. In addition, posting
a comment requires less effort than selecting and publishing a
new article. This can be a plausible explanation for this particular 
difference.

Although there are noticeable differences in the values of
the activity metrics in the studied scenarios, these differences
are not statistically significant. In the case of the baseline
scenario, the average path length is even larger than in scenarios 
1 and 2, meaning that the interaction among users forms
longer chains, and therefore the community is not as tightly
linked as in the other ones.

Finally, the value for modularity in scenario 1, being smaller 
than the baseline and scenarios 2, it can be understood as a
tendency to not forming independent groups within the community.
 In other words, this means that the community in
scenario 1 is more tightly connected than in the other scenarios.
 This seems to occur since in the formed scenario the
participants can obtain rewards with low effort.

In order to have a closer look at what happened in these
scenarios, Fig. 5 depicts a Fruchterman-Reingold visualization 
for each interaction network. The size of nodes represents
the number of published contributions, and such size is comparable 
only among nodes of the same networks. The colors of
the nodes represent the different modularity classes (i.e.,

eventual subgroups that can be identified within the commu-
nity), and the thickness of the edges represents the number of
comments that are posted in that particular sense.

In the interaction network of scenario 2 (Fig. 5c) we can
identify a clear subgroup in the community (i.e., black nodes).
This subgroup consists of 12 nodes (25 % of the network), and
it has a noticeable central leader who acts as a hub linking this
subgroup with the rest of the community. Regarding the distribution 
of posts per user (i.e., the size of nodes), we identify
that in this scenario they seem to be comparable to those to the
baseline scenario. In other words, this means that the participation 
strategy, while it motivated to publish more articles in
scenario 2, it did not have a major impact on producing more
active members than the rest of the community.

However, in the case of scenario 1 (Fig. 5c), we remark that
most nodes have an interesting participation level and there
are few lurkers (i.e., nodes that just browse and consume the
information of the community (Tedjamulia et al. 2005)). In
particular, even if in the baseline scenario there is a quite
low number of edges (i.e., interaction between community
members), we note that there is clearly a node acting as a
hub; i.e., his/her participation is rather low, but gets involved
in receiving and posting comments to others’ contributions.
Moreover, this scenario does not display a clear leader
within the community, but rather a set of central nodes that
gather the attention and drive the interaction of the other students.
 The distribution of published contributions per user is
also uneven, meaning that some community members became
regular contributors and engaged into producing new content
in the group, while others only contributed with the expected
levels agreed at the beginning of the intervention. In this case,
the interaction network structure is rather closed and it does
not display clear subgroups.

However, structurally it is possible to acknowledge the
existence of similar patterns in the intervened scenarios. In
fact, there is a small number of big central nodes (i.e., those
who post the highest number of contributions to the commu-
nity), that tend to drive the interaction with the other nodes in
the network. These nodes are usually known as veterans
(Tedjamulia et al. 2005), and the community sustainability
typically depends on them.

There are also sets of nodes that do not appear to interact
with the others, represented in the borders of the graph. These
nodes show similar interaction patterns to lurkers in a community,
 i.e., participants that do not strongly participate within
the community, but appear to act like passive entities consuming 
information and resources from the social structure, rather
than contributing. The number of these node types seems to be
larger than in scenarios 1 and 2, probably to the lack of a
proper reward that motivates the participation of these community 
members.

At this point, it turns out relevant to analyze if it is worth
considering a community structure that is composed of two or

16

Inf Syst Front (2016) 18:7–21

Fig. 5 Interaction network: (a) Scenario 0, (b) Scenario 1, (c) Scenario 2

more independent subgroups, or if it is better to have a closed
and tightly connected group. Both situations have their own
pros and cons, and the answer to this dilemma is rather unclear,
 since it depends on the context where the community is
going to be established. In this case, since we are supporting a
small partially virtual course community, we would like to
benefit from having discussions in small groups. However,
to some extent we do have to maintain the size of these subgroups,
 avoiding that they become independent and generate
traffic that will be eventually irrelevant to the rest of the
community.

Therefore, having a visualization that displays the dynamics 
of group generation over time would give signs of how the
community is evolving, and also if it turns out to be necessary
to put some control mechanisms in order to prevent the community 
break into independent subgroups. In other terms, this
kind of analysis can be used for designing monitoring strategies 
that allow determining, in real-time, the dynamics of a
community alongside its life cycle. In relation to this proposition,
 one way to affect the interaction patterns in the community 
would be to influence central nodes in the network (e.g.,
those that gather interest from other members and generate
relevant and important traffic). In terms of affecting the participation 
strategy, this would be related to motivating the
activity, aiming to integrate the different groups that appear
to be in different modularity classes.

4.3 Identifying and quantifying motifs

Figure 6 shows a histogram representing the different isomorphic 
3-node motifs in a directed network (as shown in Fig. 4).
By identifying the different 3-node motifs we can structurally
analyze, more in-depth, the network representing the community.
 Unfortunately, given that the interaction in the baseline
scenario is not high enough to even notice the existence of
triadic relationships, we note that most interactions are dyadic
and asymmetric; i.e., they are only established between two
nodes in one direction. This helps us to realize the type of

interaction that we can get among community members if
we do not motivate the participation.

Unlike the baseline scenario, in scenario 1 (i.e., where participation 
was stressed in terms of quantity), the interaction
patterns tend to have closed groups. Thus, the possibility of
completing 3-node motifs is high. In this latter scenario, the
motifs 12 and 13 count for about 50 % of the total, and they
are almost-fully connected (motif 12) and fully connected
(motif 13) 3-cliques. Therefore, this is an alternative way to
conclude that the community was tightly closed. This also
indicates that strategies rewarding low effort contributions
(like in scenario 1) can be used to motivate the participants
and get a more cohesive community.

Regarding scenario 2, motifs 3, 7 and 8 count for about
50 % of the total, and they all correspond to disconnected 3motifs.
 Indeed, when looking at the distribution of motifs
between both scenarios, it is possible to note that complete
triads are predominant in scenario 1 when compared to scenario 
2, while unconnected triads appear in scenario 2 in a
larger number than in scenario 1. This fact indicates that in
scenario 2, the community is partially connected (as opposed
to what happened in scenario 1), and community managers
could take some actions into identifying why this is happening.
 Eventually, they can try to integrate the community, if
desired.

In summary, by analyzing the histogram of 3-node motifs,
community managers can get an overview of how connected
is the community, and how the different interaction patterns
are distributed in the whole group. In other words, this technique 
can be used as an alternative tool for monitoring the
evolution of the community alongside its life cycle.

5 Implications for design

Next we present a list of considerations for software designers
when they have to define the social services to be embedded in
applications that support the activity of a community.

Inf Syst Front (2016) 18:7–21

Fig. 6 Three-node motifs found
in each interaction network

17

5.1 Providing participation rewards

Most communities, particularly those that are part of formal
organizations, need to promote participation of community
members through extrinsic rewards (Tedjamulia et al. 2005).
Recent literature has shown good results with the use of game
mechanics to promote self-promotion and encourage new
contributions, such as leaderboards, trophies and stars
(Zichermann and Cunningham 2011), particularly in learning
(Kapp 2012) and organizational scenarios (Herzig et al. 2012).
This happens because in these communities there is usually no
intrinsic motivation to participate, or such motivation is only
temporal; therefore, these communities quickly tend to diminish 
due to the lack of activity. As we have seen in scenarios 1
and 2, an extrinsic motivation strategy can considerably increase 
participation, as compared to scenarios where it is not
motivated (like in scenario 0). Indeed, the baseline scenario
helps us understand the participation that we can observe in a
community when the interaction among members is not promoted 
in any way. In a previous study, the authors identified
that the extrinsic motivation in these scenarios also helped to
keep a permanent interaction among community members
(Gutierrez et al. 2012a).

5.2 Reducing participation effort

Participation is also affected by the effort required to accomplish 
it. This becomes evident if we analyze the average
weighted degree in scenarios 1 and 2 (Table 2). As expected,
if rewards keep being stable, the number of interactions decreases 
when increases the effort required to contribute to the
community (Cheng and Vassileva 2006). Software designers
must keep this issue in mind when modeling the participation
supporting services for a community. Gamification mechanisms 
can also be used to help reduce the participation effort.
The extrinsic mechanism for promoting participation can
also be combined in order to get a more important

commitment of community members. For instance, an indicator 
(i.e., an awareness component, as those shown in Figs. 1
and 2) based on a low effort contribution strategy, can be used
to get people involved and active in the community (like in
scenario 1), while a quality based contribution strategy can
motivate and recognize to members that produce valuable
content for the community (like in scenario 2). Thus, participants 
will become more active and committed if they have a
good score in one of these two aspects. As shown by other
studies, a high participation in a community tends to encourage 
by itself the participation of the members (Dabbish et al.
2012). Multiple motivation strategies also contribute to increase 
the social representativeness of the community
members.

5.3 Supporting social representativeness

It is important that all social groups forming the community
are represented in the supporting system, and that users feel
that they belong to such community (Lampe et al. 2010). If
such a requirement is addressed, the inclusion of social services 
in information systems will have a chance to improve
the members’ experience and performance. Otherwise, people
will continue working as members of a physical community,
and the social services will probably be more an obstacle than
a contribution for the community. Figure 5 shows samples of
the subgroups that can be present in a community, even
if it is small.

Concerning our study results, in all scenarios we have identified 
lurkers; i.e., people that feel no represented by the community 
or motivated by the rewarding mechanisms used to
promote participation. However, in scenarios 1 and 2 (but
mainly in scenario 1) the interaction graph shows a more involved 
and cohesive community, with almost no lurkers. Furthermore,
 in scenario 0 (baseline), it is possible to identify a
very active node in terms of interaction with other community 
members, but with a quite low number of new

18

Inf Syst Front (2016) 18:7–21

contributions. This situation exemplifies those community 
members who are eager to engage in interaction with
other users and help sustain the community (Farzan
et al. 2011; Dabbish et al. 2012), but who fail
to
achieve it due to the group not reaching a minimal
threshold of contributions (i.e., critical mass).

This probably means that representativeness tends to increase 
if there is an extrinsic motivation to participate, and
such participation involves low effort. Contrarily, if the effort
to participate increases, the interaction graph tends to show
sub-groups (as in Figs. 5 and 6), that jeopardize the representativeness 
of the members in a community. Anyway, these
situations are identifiable by the community managers, who
can design intervention strategies to try reunifying the
community.

5.4 Providing monitoring services

Communities are dynamic entities that need to be monitored
in order to understand their current situation and evolution.
Services that show the structure of the interaction graph help
community managers to make on-time diagnosis and also corrective 
actions in case of need. For instance, several community 
risks (e.g., due to the dependency of veterans) and existence 
of sub-communities can be identified in an early stage
using these services, as shown in Fig. 5. Moreover, services
providing temporal information of member participation are
required to identify periods of inactivity that could increase
the vulnerability of the community.

In the presented study, managers did not intervene the community 
to improve participation, although they were able to do
it. The goal of this monitoring process was to establish a
diagnosis of the community based on its structure, which
was accomplished according to the managers’ opinion. The
interaction graphs shown in Fig. 5 and the histogram
depicted in Fig. 6 can be obtained in real-time, and they
provide a visual representation that describes the community 
current status. Based on it,
the manager can
perform a diagnosis and determine strategies to intervene 
the community when needed. Therefore, counting
on services for monitoring the community status and
evolution tends to be mandatory for community managers.
 Otherwise, the probability to make late or wrong
interventions grows considerably.

5.5 Enhancing community governance

In PVCs that group people belonging to the same organization 
(e.g., employees or students) or people with
professional ties (e.g., customers and service providers),
community members usually do not have an intrinsic
motivation to participate, since their participation corresponds 
to a formal
link among members instead of a

personal decision. The lack of intrinsic motivation
makes that counting on community managers turns to
be mandatory to keep the community on the move
(Gutierrez et al. 2014). Therefore, the social interaction
system supporting the community activity must consider
the services required by its managers. Moreover,
the
community member capabilities (or their roles) cannot
be assigned according to the place that
they have in
the organizational structure.

As we can see in Fig. 5a, b and c, these communities usually 
have people that are recognized by other community
members as veterans or leaders, and that are highly valuable
for the community. Their presence and participation influence
the sustainability of the community; therefore, any newcomer
must have to change his/her behavior to become veteran based
on their contributions to the community (Tedjamulia
et al. 2005).

The interaction mechanisms supported by the software
platform must allow community members to contribute and
self-regulate such contributions. Thus, regular participants can
help managers govern the community (Shea and
Bidjerano 2010).

5.6 Enabling participation awareness

Provided that people participation is the cornerstone of a community 
(Leimeister et al. 2006; Preece 2001), member contributions 
must be visible for the rest of the community. Usually
these contributions are represented through awareness mechanisms,
 as those implemented by the discussion board
supporting scenarios 1 and 2. These mechanisms can be passive 
(i.e., the user goes to the information) or active (i.e., the
information goes to the user). Typically the use of active
awareness mechanisms triggers more interactions among
community members, and make them aware of community
current activities. However, the number and way to deliver
these notifications must be designed carefully to avoid disrupt
and overwhelm the participants (Mark et al. 2008; Toninelli
and Khushraj 2008).

Figure 1 shows the participation level of the user,
and Fig. 2 shows the rating of a contribution of a participant.
 These awareness components represent a clear
concept and they must be designed to promote the participation 
of community members in terms of both,
quantity and quality of contributions (Cheng and
Vassileva 2005), as shown in scenarios 1 and 2. These
components should not only illustrate the performance
of community members (Harper et al. 2007), but also be
used to integrate people that in the border of the community;
 for instance, adding and publishing metrics that
are relevant for them. It is clear that a person is going
to participate in an online community only if s/he feels
that belongs to such group (Lampe et al. 2010).

Inf Syst Front (2016) 18:7–21

6 Conclusions and future work

This article presents a study of people participation in three
partially virtual course communities, trying to understand the
impact that different participation strategies have on the community 
activities and structure. The findings of this study inform 
to the design of new information systems that embeds
social interaction services to support the activities among
community members; particularly in the case of undergraduate 
course communities.

The study was performed on homogeneous communities of
information technology students, and it involved a period of
15 weeks. The students participating in the baseline scenario
were not externally motivated; therefore, their participation
levels correspond to those generated as consequence of the
intrinsic motivation of these community members. As expected,
 participation was low.

In scenario 1, community participation was motivated by
stressing the value of the quantity of contributions, and then
enhancing the quality of the contributions in scenario 2. The
activity within these communities was comparatively analyzed 
in terms of: (1) participation metrics, (2) structural network 
metrics, and (3) 3-node motifs that reflect the interaction
among members.

Even if we derived some relevant observations regarding
how participation can be triggered in terms of quantity and
quality, it is worth recognizing that neither of the motivation
strategies used in scenarios 1 and 2 were perfect. In the case of
scenario 1, the community tended to follow a snowball effect,
where publishing new contributions and generating traffic became 
the center of the community, rather than the interaction
itself. In the other case (scenario 2), the community tended to
split into two subgroups that interacted independently. Considering 
these results, we can infer that the participation strategy 
clearly affected the community structure and the interaction 
patterns among its members.

By analyzing the different structural network metrics, and
more precisely, by having a visualization that displays the
dynamics of group generation over time, we can get a first
idea on how the community evolves, and also if it is necessary
to install some control mechanisms to prevent the community
from breaking into independent subgroups. In other terms, this
kind of analysis can be used for designing strategies to monitor 
(in real-time) the dynamics of a community alongside its
life cycle. Another alternative for monitoring the community
activity is analyzing the structure of its interaction graph, in
terms of motifs. It reflects the inner interaction patterns within
the community.

Partially virtual communities are a particular case of online
communities, where the key differences are that the former
require mechanisms to actively support face-to-face interaction,
 awareness and coordination mechanisms. The case study
findings then allow raising several design issues, which

19

should be considered when modeling platforms or services
to support the activities of partially virtual and online communities.
 We also suggest some solutions to address these design
issues, which are grounded in the literature of online communities,
 and are extended to the case of PVCs. Provided that
everyday more and more the information systems embed social 
interaction services to improve the user experience and
performance, designers of these systems could take advantage
of this study results, not only when extending the existing
solutions, but also when conceiving the new ones.

There are three major limitations in this study. First, we
modeled the interaction network as a directed weighted graph.
However, the presented motif classes are based on directed
unweighted graphs. Therefore, in the case of detecting weighted 
edges that outnumber the frequency of a particular motif
class, we would need to analyze further in detail the resulting
patterns, and eventually decide if they need to be considered
as independent objects. Thus, the global motif distribution of
the network would be altered. Second, some of the presented
observations might be due to the differences in the even homogeneous 
student communities. These limitations will be
further analyzed and possibly mitigated in a second stage of
this study. Finally, the experimental design followed a
between-groups (independent) approach instead of withinsubject 
(repeated-measures). The reason behind this decision
is the difficulty of collecting meaningful data in the specific
scenario covered in our study. Indeed, we were limited on an
observation period of just 15 weeks, thus making it impossible
to introduce two independent interventions to a same group of
students. Therefore, even if we cannot completely generalize
the study results due to the possible presence of environmental
factors, we found that the findings are indeed backed by the
literature, and they provide more evidence to support the design 
and sustainability of participation in partially virtual
course communities.

As future work, we are interested in identifying the correct
metrics to monitor the evolution of a community alongside its
life cycle, and how to design visualizations aiming to help
community managers understand the dynamics of an online
community in real-time.

Acknowledgments This work has been partially supported by the
Fondecyt Project (Chile), grant: 1150252. The work of Francisco J. Gutierrez 
has been supported by the Ph.D. Scholarship Program of Conicyt
Chile (CONICYT-PCHA/Doctorado Nacional/2013-21130075).

References

Acquisti, A., & Gross, R. (2006). Imagined communities: awareness,
information sharing, and privacy on the facebook. In G. Danezis
& P. Golle (Eds.), Privacy enhanced technologies. LNCS (Vol.
4258, pp. 36–58). Heidelberg: Springer.

20

Inf Syst Front (2016) 18:7–21

Antunes, P., Herskovic, V., Ochoa, S. F., & Pino, J. A. (2014). Reviewing
the quality of awareness support in collaborative applications.
Journal of Systems and Software, 89, 146–169.

Barjis, J., Gupta, A., & Sharda, R. (2011). Knowledge work and communication 
challenges in networked enterprises. Information Systems
Frontiers, 13(5), 615–619.

Baxter, G., & Sommerville, I. (2011). Socio-technical systems: from design 
methods to systems engineering. Interacting with Computers,
23(1), 4–17.

Butler, B. S. (2001). Membership size, communication activity and sus-
tainability: the internal dynamics of networked social structures.
Information Systems Research, 12(4), 356–362.

Cheng, R., Vassileva, J. (2005). User motivation and persuasion strategy
for peer-to-peer communities. In: Proc. of the 38th HICSS. Hawaii,
United States.

Cheng, R., & Vassileva, J. (2006). Design and evaluation of an adaptive
incentive mechanism for sustained educational online communities.
User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, 16(3), 321–348.

Choi, J., Heo, S., Han, J., Lee, G. & Song, J. (2013). Mining social
relationship types in an organization using communication patterns.
In: Proc. of CSCW’13. San Antonio, USA.

D’Andrea, A., Ferri, F., & Grifoni, P. (2009). An overview of methods for
virtual social networks analysis. In A. Abraham, A.-E. Hassanien, &
V. Snasel (Eds.), Computational social network analysis: trends,
tools and research advances. Heidelberg: Springer.

Dabbish, L., Farzan, R., Kraut, R. & Postmes, T. (2012). Fresh faces in
the crowd: turnover, identity, and commitment in online groups. In:
Proc. of CSCW’12. Seattle, USA.

Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, C., West, R., Jurafsky, D., Leskovec, J. &
Potts, C. (2013). No Country for Old Members: User Lifecycle
and Linguistic Change in Online Communities. In: Proc. of
WWW’13. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Davies, J., & Graff, M. (2003). Performance in e-learning: online participation 
and student grades. British Journal of Educational
Technology, 36(4), 657–663.

de Laat, M., Lally, V., Lipponen, L., & Simons, R. (2007). Investigating
patterns of interaction in networked learning and computersupported 
collaborative learning: a role for social network analysis.
International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative
Learning, 2(1), 87–103.

Farzan, R., Dabbish, L.A., Kraut, R.E. & Postmes, T. (2011). Increasing
commitment to online communities by designing for social presence.
 In: Proc. of CSCW’11. Hangzhou, China.

Geyer, W., Dugan, C., Brownholtz, B., Masli, M., Daly, E.M. & Millen,
D.R. (2011). An open, social microcalender for the enterprise:
Timely? In: Proc. of CHI’11. Vancouver BC, Canada.

Grgecic, D. & Rosenkranz, C. (2010). Information systems change and
social interaction: A research agenda. In: Proc. of the 18th European
Conference on Information Systems. Pretoria, South Africa.

Grudin, J. (1994). Groupware and social dynamics: eight challenges for

developers. Communications of the ACM, 37(1), 92–105.

Gutierrez, F., Baloian, N., & Zurita, G. (2011). Boosting participation in
virtual communities. In A. S. Vivacqua, C. Gutwin, & M. R. S.
Borges (Eds.), Collaboration and technology. LNCS (Vol. 6969,
pp. 14–29). Heidelberg: Springer.

Gutierrez, F., Baloian, N., Ochoa, S.F. & Zurita, G. (2012a). A Conceptual
Model to Design Partially Virtual Communities. In: Proc. of CSCW
D’12. Wuhan, China.

Gutierrez, F., Baloian, N., Ochoa, S. F., & Zurita, G. (2012b). Designing
the software support for partially virtual communities. In V.
Herskovic et al. (Eds.), Collaboration and technology. LNCS (Vol.
7493, pp. 73–88). Heidelberg: Springer.

Gutierrez, F., Zurita, G., Ochoa, S. F., & Baloian, N. (2013). Analyzing
two participation strategies in an undergraduate course community.
In P. Antunes et al. (Eds.), Collaboration and technology. LNCS
(Vol. 8224, pp. 143–158). Heidelberg: Springer.

Gutierrez, F., Ochoa, S.F., Baloian, N., Zurita, G. & Loyola, L. (2014). An
architecture to support the design and evaluation of software platforms 
for partially virtual communities. Accepted in Computer and
Informatics. In press.

Hamari, J., Koivisto, J. & Sarsa, H. (2014). Does gamification work? A
literature review of empirical studies on gamification. In: Proc. of
HICSS’14. Hawaii, USA.

Hammond, M. (2005). A review of recent papers on online discussion in
teaching and learning in higher education. Journal of Asynchronous
Learning Networks, 9(3), 9–23.

Harper, M., Li, X., Chen, Y. & Konstan, J. (2007). Social comparisons to
motivate contributions to an online community. In: Proceedings of
the 2nd International Conference on Persuasive Technology. Palo
Alto, United States.

Harrer, A., Malzahn, N., Zeini, S. & Hoppe, U. (2007). Combining social
network analysis with semantic relations to support the evolution of
a scientific community. In: Proc. of CSCL’07. New Jersey, USA.

Herskovic, V., Neyem, A., Ochoa, S.F., Pino, J.A. & Antunes, P. (2012).
Understanding presence awareness information needs among engineering 
students. In: Proc. of CSCWD’12. Wuhan, China.

Herzig, P., Strahringer, S. & Ameling, M. (2012). Gamification of ERP
systems – Exploring gamification effects on user acceptance constructs.
 In: Proc. of MKWI’12. Braunschweig, Germany.

Hovorka, D. S., & Larsen, K. R. (2005). Organizational information
system adoption: A network perspective. In R. L. Baskerville, L.
Mathiassen, J. Pries-Heje, & J. I. DeGross (Eds.), Business afility
and information technology diffusion. Heidelberg: Springer.

Iriberri, A., & Leroy, G. (2009). A life-cyle perspective on online community 
success. ACM Computing Surveys, 41(2), 11:1–11:29.

Janzik, L. & Herstatt, C. (2008). Innovation communities: Motivation and
incentives for community members to contribute. In: Proc. of ICMIT
2008. Bangkok, Thailand.

Kapp, K. M. (2012). The gamification of learning and instruction: Gamebased 
methods and strategies for training and education.
Chichester: Wiley.

Kashtan, N., Itzkovitz, S., Milo, R., & Alon, U. (2004). Efficient sampling 
algorithm for estimating sub-graph concentrations and detecting 
network motifs. Bioinformatics, 20(11), 1746–1758.

Kim, A. J. (2000). Community building on the web: Secret strategies for

successful online communities. Berkeley: Peachpit Press.

Lampe, C., Wash, R., Velasquez, A. & Ozkaya, E. (2010). Motivations to
participate in online communities. In: Proc. of CHI’10. Atlanta,
Georgia, USA, 1927–1936.

Leimeister, J. M., Sidiras, P., & Krcmar, H. (2006). Exploring success
factors of virtual communities: the perspectives of members and
operators. Journal of Organizational Computing and Electronic
Commerce, 16(3–4), 277–298.

Mark, G., Gudith, D., & Klocke, U. (2008). The cost of interrupted work:

more speed and stress. In: Proc. of CHI’08. Florence, Italy.

Martinez, A., Dimitriadis, Y., Gomez, E., Rubia, B., Jorrin, I., & Marcos,
J. (2006). Studying participation networks in collaboration using
mixed methods. International Journal of Computer-Supported
Collaborative Learning, 1(3), 383–408.

Martyn, M. A. (2005). Using interaction in online discussion boards.

Educause Quarterly, 4, 61–62.

Neyem, A., Ochoa, S. F., & Pino, J. A. (2011). A patterns system to
coordinate mobile groupware applications. Group Decision and
Negotiation, 20(5), 563–592.

Ochoa, S. F., Pino, J. A., Baloian, N., Antunes, P. & Herskovic, V. (2012).
Some observations from the analysis of an online discussion board.
In: Proc. of SMC 2012. Seoul, Korea.

Oinas-Kukkonen, H., Lyytinen, K., & Yoo, Y. (2011). Social networks
and information systems: ongoing and future research streams.
Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 11(2), 61–68.

Inf Syst Front (2016) 18:7–21

21

Patnayakuni, R., & Ruppel, C. P. (2010). A socio-technical approach to
improving the systems development process. Information Systems
Frontiers, 12(2), 219–234.

Preece, J. (2001). Sociability and usability in online communities: determining 
and measuring success. Behavior and Information
Technology, 20(5), 347–356.

Preece, J., & Shneiderman, B. (2009). The reader-to-leader framework:
motivating technology-mediated social participation. AIS
Tranactions on Human-Computer Interaction, 1(1), 13–32.

Raban, D., Moldovan, M. & Jones, Q. (2010). An empirical study of
critical mass and online community survival. In: Proc. of
CSCW’10. Savannah, United States.

Reffay, C., Teplovs, C. & Blondel, F. (2011). Productive re-use of CSCL
data and analytic tools to provide a new perspective on group cohesion.
 In: Proc. of CSCL’11. Hong Kong, China.

Rowe, M. & Alani, H. (2012). What makes communities tick?
Community health analysis using role compositions. In: Proc. of
SocialCom’12. Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Schummer, T., & Lukosch, S. (2007). Patterns for computer-mediated

interaction. Chichester: Wiley.

Scott, J. G. (2012). Social network analysis. London: Sage Publications.
Shami, N.S., Muller, M.J. & Millen, D.R. (2011). Browse and discover:
Social file sharing in the enterprise. In: Proc. of CSCW’11.
Hangzhou, China.

Shami, N.S., Yang, J., Panc, L., Dugan, C., Ratchford, T., Rasmussen,
J.C., Assogba, Y., Steier, T., Soule, T., Lupushor, S., Geyer, W., Guy,
I. & Ferrar, J. (2014). Understanding employee social media chatter
with enterprise social pulse. In: Proc. of CSCW’14. Baltimore, USA.
Shea, P., & Bidjerano, T. (2010). Learning presence: towards a theory of
self-efficacy, self-regulation, and the development of communities
of inquiry in online and blended learning environments. Computers
& Education, 55, 1721–1731.

Tedjamulia, S.J., Olsen, D.R., Dean, D.L. & Albrecht, C.C. (2005).
Motivating content contributions to online communities: Toward a
more comprehensive theory. In: Proc. of HICSS’05. Hawaii, USA.
Toninelli, A. & Khushraj, D. (2008). Towards socially aware mobile

phones. In SWC 2008 Workshop on Social Data on the Web.

Vonderwell, S., & Zachariah, S. (2005). Factors that influence participation 
in online learning. Journal of Research on Technology in
Education, 38(2), 213–230.

Wang, M. (2011). Integrating organizational, social, and individual perspectives 
in web 2.0-based workplace e-learning. Information
Systems Frontiers, 13(2), 191–205.

Wang, F.-Y., Zeng, D., Carley, K. M., & Kao, W. (2007). Social comput-
ing: from social informatics to social intelligence. IEEE Intelligent
Systems, 22(2), 79–83.

Wasserman, S., & Faust, K. (1994). Social network analysis: Methods

and applications. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Wellman, B. (1996). For a social network analysis of computer networks:
A sociological perspective on collaborative work and virtual community.
 In: Proc. of the 1996 ACM SIGCPR/SIGMIS Conf. on computer 
personnel research. Denver, United States.

Westerlund, M., Rajala, R., Nykänen, K. & Järvensivu, T. (2009). Trust
and commitment in social networking – Lessons learned from two
empirical studies. In: Proc. of the 25th IMP Conference. Marseille,
France.

Whitworth, B. & Ahmad, A. (2013). The social design of technical sys-
tems: Building technologies for communities. The Interaction
Design Foundation.

Yang, J., Adamic, L.A., Ackerman, M.S., Wen, Z. & Lin, C.-Y. (2012).
The Way I Talk to You: Sentiment Expression in an Organizational
Context. In: Proc. of CHI’12. Austin, USA.

Zhang, J., Qu, Y., Cody, J. & Wu, Y. (2010). A case study of microblogging 
in the enterprise: Use, value, and related issues. In: Proc.
of CHI’10. Atlanta, USA.

Zichermann, G., & Cunningham, C. (2011). Gamification by design:
Implementing game mechanics in Web and mobile apps.
Sebastopol: O’Reilly.

Francisco J. Gutierrez Is a Ph.D. candidate in computer science at the
University of Chile. His research interests include human factors in computing 
systems, social computing, and computer science education. His
overall research goal is to study interpersonal communication in face-toface 
and computer-mediated scenarios using qualitative and quantitative
methods, and apply this knowledge to design and evaluate new technology 
to connect people and promote offline encounters in a variety of
scenarios, such as families, local communities, and educational settings.
He is a student member of ACM, and of the ACM Special Interest Group
on Computer-Human Interaction (SIGCHI).

Sergio F. Ochoa Is an associate professor of computer science at the
University of Chile. He received his Ph.D. in computer science from
the Catholic University of Chile. His research interests include
computer-supported cooperative work, software engineering, mobile
and ubiquitous computing, and educational technology. Dr. Ochoa is
member of IEEE, ACM, and the Chilean Computer Society. He sits on
the Steering Committee of LACCIR (Latin American and Caribbean
Collaborative ITC Research Initiative). He has worked as a software
engineer for more than 10 years and he currently serves as an IT consultant 
for a number of public and privative organizations in Chile.

Gustavo Zurita Received his Ph.D. in Civil Engineering, with Computer
Science major from Catholic University of Chile. Currently he is an
Associate Professor at the Department of Management Control and Information 
Systems of the Faculty of Economics and Business of the
Universidad de Chile. His main research topics are computer supported
mobile collaborative learning, collaborative knowledge construction and
geo-collaboration. He is an author of about 50 conference articles and
more than 20 ISI-indexed journal articles. Some of his journal articles are
among the most cited ones in mobile computer supported learning in the
world.

Nelson Baloian Graduated as Computer Engineering from the
Universidad de Chile in the year 1987. He obtained his PhD. from the
University of Duisburg, Germany in the year 1997. His main research
subject has been Computer Supported Learning and Distributed Systems,
being author of more than 20 journal publications related on these subjects 
and peer reviewed 80 conferences. He has been visiting professor at
the universities of Waseda, Japan, and Duisburg-Essen, Germany. He is
currently Associate Professor at the Department of Computer Science of
the Universidad de Chile in Santiago, Chile.

