Supporting Smart Community Decision

Making for Self-governance

with Multiple Views

Gustavo Zurita1, José A. Pino2, and Nelson Baloian2(&)

1 Management Control and Information Systems Department,

Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile

2 Computer Science Department, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile

gzurita@fen.uchile.cl

{jpino,nbaloian}@dcc.uchile.cl

Abstract. Size and evolution of current cities present a great challenge to their
inhabitants to make them develop in a harmonious and sustainable way. People
living in large cities ﬁnd many obstacles to participate in the urban development
decisions affecting them directly. A tool which supports citizens in gathering,
combining and visualizing the information, as well as proposing, discussing and
selecting the best ideas for urban improvement would certainly help them to
accomplish this task, thus contributing to the development of a more participatory 
society and a smarter city with better reaction capabilities to changes in
the environment. In this work we present a smart city application, intended for
citizens living in an urban community enabling them to present and share their
opinions, comments and interests. The application also should support citizens
to make decisions. Those decisions should inﬂuence local authorities concerning
community improvements. The application may be used with any subject relevant 
to an urban community and thus, it could be useful in many scenarios of
citizens’ participation and decision making. It includes multiple views: timebased,
 spatial and relational.
Keywords: Smart city  Smart community  Multiple views

1 Introduction

According to the United Nations [1], over the last year the balance between those living
in urban areas and those living in rural areas tipped irrevocably over to the urban side.
Size and evolution of current cities present a great challenge to their inhabitants to
make them develop in a harmonious and sustainable way. An instance in Chile is
presented in [35]: a 2012 law establishes several constraints to the installation of new
telecommunication antennas by mobile phones service providers. Some of these constraints 
concern the minimum distance allowed from the new antenna to previous
antennas, hospitals and schools. Moreover, the law forces the company which is
installing the antenna to propose and ﬁnance some works to improve the urban environment 
of the area where the antenna is to be located, which is deﬁned by a circle with
a 500 m. diameter and centered at the place where the antenna is going to be located.

© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
J.M. García-Chamizo et al. (Eds.): UCAmI 2015, LNCS 9454, pp. 134–143, 2015.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-26401-1_13

Supporting Smart Community Decision Making for Self-governance

135

These urban improvement works should be approved by the people living in the area,
who have the possibility of analyzing the project and raising concerns during certain
time frame after the project is proposed, typically 30 days. In order to be able to
properly react in such a short time, it is highly recommendable that people use
Information Technology (IT) allowing them to analyze the necessary information in an
effective and efﬁcient way [2–4].

In this work we present a smart city application, intended for citizens living in an
urban community enabling them to present and share their opinions, comments and
interests. The application also should support citizens to make decisions. Those decisions 
should inﬂuence local authorities concerning community improvements. The
application may be used with any subject relevant to an urban community and thus, it
could be useful in many scenarios of citizens’ participation and decision making.

Users of this application may share information about proposals on geo-referenced
subjects on a map. Examples of such proposals are described in [5, 6]. The application
can be run from any type of computer device, such as desktop PCs, Tablet PCs, or
smartphones. Mobility and pervasiveness may favor the choice of Tablet PCs or
smartphones [5, 7–9, 36].

2 Smart City Deﬁnitions

The term Smart Cities may have its origins in the Smart Growth proposed by Bollier in
1998 [10], which advocated new policies for urban planning. The term has been
adopted since 2005 by a number of technology companies such as Cisco [11], Siemens
[12], and IBM [13] for the application of complex information systems to integrate the
operation of urban infrastructure and services such as buildings, transportation, electrical 
and water distribution, or public safety. It has since evolved to mean almost any
form of technology-based innovation in the planning, development, and operation of
cities. Smart city mainly focuses on applying the next-generation IT to all contexts of
human life, regularly embedding sensors and equipment to hospitals, power grids,
railways, bridges, tunnels, roads, buildings, water systems, dams, oil and gas pipelines
and other objects in every corner of the world [14]. The concept of Smart City has
become popular across the world and is currently the center of attention for industry
and governments globally [15]. In spite of this, its exact deﬁnition is still not wellestablished 
[16, 17]. Several working deﬁnitions of Smart City have been put forward
and adopted in both practical and academic use; we selected nine deﬁnitions which
belongs to the most relevant papers found in the literature: (1) Partridge [18], “A city
where the ICT strengthen the freedom of speech and the availability of public information 
and services”. (2) Bowerman [19], “A city that monitors and integrates conditions 
of all of its critical infrastructures, including roads, bridges tunnels, rails,
subways, airports, seaports communications, water, power, even major buildings can
better optimize its resources, plan its preventive maintenance activities, and monitor
security aspects while maximizing services to its citizens”. (3) Caragliu et al. [20],
“A city that
invests in human and social capital and traditional and modern
(ICT) communication infrastructure in order to sustain the economic growth and a high
quality of life, with a wise management of natural resources, through participatory

136

G. Zurita et al.

governance”. (4) Kehoe et al. [21], “It makes optimal use of all the interconnected
information available today to better understand and control its operations and optimize
the use of limited resources”. (5) Rios [4], “A city that gives inspiration, shares culture,
knowledge, and life, a city that motivates its inhabitants to create and ﬂourish in their
own lives”. (6) Harrison [3], “A city connecting the physical infrastructure, the ICT
infrastructure, the social infrastructure, and the business infrastructure to leverage the
collective intelligence of the city”. (7) Anttiroiko et al. [22], “A city that reﬂects a
particular idea of local community, one where city governments, enterprises and residents 
use ICTs to reinvent and reinforce the community’s role in the new service
economy, create jobs locally and improve the quality of community life”. (8) Gifﬁnger
[23], “A city well performing in a forward-looking way in economy, people, governance,
 mobility, environment, and living, built on the smart combination of endowments 
and activities of self-decisive, independent and aware citizens”. (9) Washburn
[24], “The use of Smart Computing technologies to make the critical infrastructure
components and services of a city–which include city administration, education,
healthcare, public safety, real estate, transportation, and utilities—more intelligent,
interconnected, and efﬁcient”.

There are two aspects in the above deﬁnitions which are most relevant for our
proposal: one is which topics of a city are covered by the deﬁnitions and the other one
is the common part of all deﬁnitions.

2.1 Topics Covered by a Smart City

It is common sense that a metropolitan area can be classiﬁed as smart when safety,
enhanced public services, healthcare monitoring, green sustainability, high social
interaction, and efﬁcient transportation systems become available to any citizen in any
location [14, 25]. This condition then requires to design, develop, deploy, and maintain
public and private infrastructures, based on advanced and integrated materials, sensors,
electronics, computer systems, and databases. Analyzing the deﬁnitions presented in
the previous section, and the review of the literature [3, 24–28], we can identify eight
key topics covered by a Smart City. The aspects covered by Smart City are: smart
energy, smart building, smart mobility, smart infrastructure, smart technology,
smart healthcare, smart governance, and smart people.

2.2 Common Aspects to Smart City Deﬁnitions

According to our analysis and to [29], the common aspects to the Smart City deﬁnitions
are: people (smart people), technology (smart infrastructure, smart technology, smart
mobility) and governance (smart governance). These can be regarded as the drivers to
achieve a Smart City. Smart People are individuals or organizations that are engaged
in the success of the smart city [4]. They use their creativity in leveraging the city
infrastructure in order to create social, economic and environmental values. Smart
people must be committed to lifelong learning, and sharing of knowledge [19, 29].
These characteristics enable them to create a sustainable smart economy, smart environment 
and smart education system. Smart Technology is the platform that allows

Supporting Smart Community Decision Making for Self-governance

137

the interaction among smart people. This platform is referred to as the technology of
the city. Technology in a smart city includes all the infrastructure, ICT, applications
(smart technologies), digital networks (smart infrastructure) and mobile devices (smart
mobility) [19, 29]. These technologies are used as a communication channel where
smart people share knowledge, skills and services. The technology is leveraged in order
to maximize the value to smart people [20]. Smart Governance includes policies,
regulations and directives that encourage collaboration, partnership and participation
within the smart city. Governance ensures that the actors within the Smart City act in a
predictable and monitored manner. Governance oversees the standardization of how
various stakeholders interact within the smart city [19].

2.3

Smart Community

The notion of using Internet technology to work together towards a common goal is the
foundation of smart communities [15, 30]. A smart community is a group of citizens
that work together to leverage information technologies in the creation of economic,
cultural and social value or for supporting decision-making of actions which are to be
implemented by the government or local authorities. Smart people of a Smart community 
can include citizens, government or even business organizations [15, 30]. In
other words, a smart community is a system where citizens and organizations (public
and private) use smart technology to enhance the way they conduct their everyday
business and decisions. This enhancement can lead to advantages, such as new revenue
streams, attaining new knowledge that can be used to improve the efﬁciency of business 
functions or government decisions, better life conditions, higher level of participation 
in community life, better community decision making, etc. Smart Communities
are a kind of Smart City enabling and empowering citizens, supporting their individual
and common quests for well-being [6].

3 Smart People as Sensors

There are initiatives that
investigate the power of collective, although imprecise
intelligence of citizens in a Smart Cities scenario. The main visionary goal is to
automate the organization of spontaneous and impromptu collaborations of large
groups of people participating in collective actions (Smart Communities according to
our understanding), such as in the notable case of urban crowdsensing [5]. In a
crowdsensing environment, people or their mobile devices act as both sensors that
collect urban data and actuators that take actions in the city, possibly upon request.
According to [5], managing the crowdsensing process is a challenging task spanning
several socio-technical issues: from the characterization of the regions under control to
the quantiﬁcation of the sensing density needed to obtain a certain accuracy; from the
evaluation of a good balance between sensing accuracy and resource usage (number of
people involved, network bandwidth, battery usage, etc.) to the selection of good
incentives for people to participate (monetary, social, etc.). To tackle these problems,
the researchers in [5] propose a crowdsensing platform with three main original

138

G. Zurita et al.

technical aspects: (1) an innovative geo-localized social model to proﬁle users along
several variables, such as time, location, social interaction, service usage, and human
activities; (2) a matching algorithm to autonomously choose people to involve in
participations and (3) to quantify the performance of their sensing.

According to [8], as a special form of crowdsourcing [2], mobile crowdsensing aims
to provide a mechanism to involve participants from the general public to efﬁciently and
effectively contribute and utilize context-related sensing data from their mobile devices
in solving speciﬁc problems in collaborations. Mobile crowdsensing leverages human
intelligence to collect, process, and aggregate sensing data using individuals’ mobile
devices to realize a higher-quality and more efﬁcient sensing solution. A speciﬁc scenario 
of use of this mobile crowdsensing concept is presented in [7], and [31].

4 Multiple Views

Multiple Coordinated Views is a speciﬁc exploratory visualization technique that
enables users to explore their data, that is displayed in two or more different forms [32].
In fact, the overall premise for the technique is that users understand their data better if
they interact with the presented information and view it through various representations.
 These multiple representations describe the situation where there may be multiple
interpretations of the data, and hence different viewpoints from those interpretations.
This is obviously useful in education, since the learner may understand the information
better through a certain presentation rather than through another one. Through multiple
views and multiform representations the user can easily compare the data from two or
more representations. Speciﬁcally, systems that solely use two side- by-side views are
named dual view systems [33].

5 A Smart Community Application

As we said in the introductory section, we want to design an application for a Smart
community which supports its members to discuss issues relevant to the community
which may also include a decision making process. The design principles of this
application consider the idea of supporting smart people forming a smart community
for improving self-governance and participation including the ideas of Multiple Views
and smart people as sensors. In order to allow people to use it wherever they are, the
application has been implemented as a web application which can be accessed and run
with smartphones, tablets or desktop PCs. However, due to the design of the interface a
tablet would be the most convenient device in order to be mobile and have a good
overview of the application at the same time. Functions are provided for users in order
to share messages, comment on posts, add categories to messages, and check the
various messages associated with certain categories. Messages can be private or public;
and it can be geo-referenced on the map.

The application allows users to log in into a session creating a new user to the
system or using her/his credentials of Facebook or Twitter. The idea is that a new
session is created for a new discussion and/or decision topic. Users contribute in

Supporting Smart Community Decision Making for Self-governance

139

various forms: Create a new entry, which are called as “feeds” in the application,
comment a feed (own or from another user), like a follow-up in a conversation, and
“vote” for or against a feed, very much similar to whatever is possible to do in social
sites like Twitter or Facebook. Users can also associate two more important elements to
a feed: one is a geographical location, and the other is one or more tags. The geographical 
location may be added automatically if the user clicks a pushdown button on
the interface and if the device she/he is using does have a GPS. The other way is to
click over a map which is displayed along with the feeds when the feed is being
created. The point associated with the feed will be highlighted with a mark, which will
display the feed’s title if clicked. Tags can be assigned by selecting them from a
pre-stored list, which can be entered at the creation of the session, or by typing a new
tag. Feeds can be private or public. The idea is that the user can take some time in order
to “prepare” the feed and reﬁne it several times before publishing it when he/she is
satisﬁed with its current form and content.

The most interesting features of the application are those related to browsing the
already entered information. There are three browsing modes: one is a list of all feeds
ordered by date and time of issue. They are shown at the left hand side of the screen as
a green box with the title, content, the author’s name, the timestamp, a button to
show-hide the tags originally assigned by the author or assigned later by other users,
and another button to show-hide the comments the feed has received from other users.
At the beginning of feeds list there is a button labeled with a “+” for creating new feeds.
The Second view is a map showing the markers to which the feeds have been
associated. This map is downloaded directly from GoogleMaps and therefore they have
all the features provided by them, such as zooming in and out, navigating through the
whole world, etc. The third view is a conceptual map in which nodes are shown as a
cyan colored circle and labelled with the name of all tags that have been associated to a
feed. The nodes are connected by a line to a green rectangle labelled with the title of the
feed. Thus, when one feed has more than one tag the visual effect is a subgraph in
which two or more nodes labelled with the tag names are connected to a central
rectangle containing the title of the feed.

As we previously mentioned, the innovative aspect proposed by this work is the
implementation of an interface with small-multiple views of the same information
(geo-localized, tagged feed of an online forum) which are synchronized: when one feed
is selected by the user from the feeds list then its corresponding mark on the map view
and the green box in the concept map representing it are also highlighted. When a mark
in the map view is selected (by clicking on it), its corresponding feed in the feeds list
and the corresponding box in the concept map are also highlighted. When one node of
the concept map is selected (by clicking on it) then all the feeds associated with it are
also highlighted in the map view and the feeds list. If the selected node in the concept
map is a tag, more than one feed might be highlighted in the other views. Consequently,
 when more than one feed are found by the search engine, all of them are
highlighted in the three views. The idea behind providing multiple views is that they
allow users to explore data from various points of view and this will help them to
understand them better, browse them in various ways and see relations on one view
which are not clear in another. The application has been implemented so that it can be
used in the web. It means it can be accessed and run on any computer device having a

140

G. Zurita et al.

HTML5 compatible web browser like Google Chrome, Firefox, Opera, etc. It also
means the application can be used on smartphones, tablets or desktop PCs. Tablets are
the best devices because of their screen size and mobility, which adds ubiquity and
therefore the possibility of crowdsensing, since the users can act as human sensors of
what is going on in the neighborhood [5, 7–9].

6 Usability Test of the Application

The application was tested with real users. The community is a condominium called
Santa Carolina, near Santiago, Chile. The community includes inhabitants of 32 homes
covering a property of about 50 acres. The community faced the need to select projects
to be developed during 2015. Several projects had been proposed beforehand, such as
public lighting improvement, roads repair, installation of a security hut, and generation
of a manual of use of public spaces. The application was used to support the project
selection process by the community members. At the end of the testing period, users
were asked to ﬁll out a usability questionnaire to evaluate the application structure, its
ease of use, its ease to understand, its appearance, and the user experience. The
questionnaire was adapted from [34].

The period of use was deﬁned between Nov. 24 and Nov. 30, 2014. Ages of
participants ranged 18–47 years old. All administrators’ projects were loaded to the
application with their corresponding categories. Then, during a week the community
members could post their comments on the projects, cast votes and visualize information 
according to time line, geographic map and conceptual map. Besides, they
could create new projects and categories, and associate categories to the projects
already in the system. Seventy-ﬁve percent of the community members participated in
the experiment. A total of 23 projects were presented, 15 of them were geo-referenced,
and 19 were associated to categories. The number of comments was 55 and 48 votes
were received (31 positive, 17 negative). The number of participants was 24, with 20 of
them accessing through their Facebook or Twitter accounts.

The next assertions can be stated based on the results of the usability questionnaire:
(1) Application structure: The structure of the application together with its coherence
were well evaluated, mainly with the choices “I agree” and “I strongly agree”. (2) Ease
of use: Most aspects were well evaluated, mostly with the “I agree” choice. However,
interactivity was badly evaluated, mostly with the “I disagree” option. (3) Ease of
understanding: help and feedback had a mixed evaluation, mostly with the “I agree”
and “I disagree” options. Search for information was very well evaluated, with the “I
strongly agree” option. (4) Appearance: it was well evaluated, with the “I agree”
choice. (5) User experience: most people chose “I agree” with the statement of having a
nice experience using the application.

Supporting Smart Community Decision Making for Self-governance

141

7 Conclusions and Future Work

The smart city application described in this paper is an attempt to achieve the development 
of communities of citizens living under the concept of smart people, smart
technology and smart governance. The application’s user interface introduces multiple
views and it can beneﬁt users in the sense of better understanding of the competing
projects and therefore it may increase community members’ participation. It is possible
to raise issues concerning the real-world applicability of the tool mentioning the
advantages for the community of having a face-to-face meeting. In our experiment,
e.g., it is clearly positive the condominium inhabitants meet together to talk about the
possible projects to develop by their community. However, the application was not
developed as a replacement of a face-to-face meeting; rather, the application can
complement one or more face-to-face meetings. Thus, people who cannot be present at
a face-to-face meeting can still participate in the decision making process. Also, people
using the application have more time to ponder the advantages and disadvantages of
each project, talk to other people or within the family about them before casting votes,
and perhaps change their minds at any time. Therefore, the time frame for an asynchronous 
discussion is much more convenient than the duration of just one face-to-face
meeting.

It is easy to draw a parallel between the scenario for this experiment and the
scenario which was mentioned in the introduction, where a community of neighbors
has to analyze the proposal of urban improvements proposed by a company which is
going to install a communication antenna in their neighborhood [35]. This application
will help them counter-propose, discuss and select the projects they would like to be
implemented.

References

1. UN world’s population increasingly urban with more than half living in urban areas. News

(2014)

2. Batty, M., et al.: Smart cities of the future. Eur. Phys. J. Spec. Top. 214(1), 481–518 (2012)
3. Harrison, C., et al.: Foundations for smarter cities. IBM J. Res. Dev. 54(4), 1–16 (2010)
4. Rios, P.: Creating “The smart city” (2012)
5. Cardone, G., et al.: Fostering participation in smart cities: a geo-social crowdsensing

platform. IEEE Commun. Mag. 51(6), 112–119 (2013)

6. Daniel, S., Doran, M.-A.: geoSmartCity: geomatics contribution to the smart city. In:
Proceedings of the 14th Annual International Conference on Digital Government Research,
ACM (2013)

7. Aihara, K., et al.: Crowdsourced mobile sensing for smarter city life. In: 2014 IEEE 7th
International Conference on Service-Oriented Computing and Applications (SOCA), IEEE
(2014)

8. Hu, X., et al.: Multidimensional context-aware social network architecture for mobile

crowdsensing. IEEE Commun. Mag. 52(6), 78–87 (2014)

9. Yan, T., et al.: mCrowd: a platform for mobile crowdsourcing. In: Proceedings of the 7th

ACM Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems, ACM (2009)

142

G. Zurita et al.

10. Bollier, D.: How Smart Growth Can Stop Sprawl: A Fledgling Citizen Movement Expands.

Essential Books, Washington, DC (1998)

11. Cisco Dubai: The smart city (2005)
12. Siemens: Stadt der Zukunft (2004)
13. IBM: Smarter cities: New York 2009 (2009)
14. Komninos, N., Schaffers, H., Pallot, M.: Developing a policy roadmap for smart cities and
the future internet. In: eChallenges e-2011 Conference Proceedings, IIMC International
Information Management Corporation, IMC Information Management Corporation (2011)
15. Phahlamohlaka, J., et al.: Towards a smart community centre: SEIDET digital village. In:
Kimppa, K., Whitehouse, D., Kuusela, T., Phahlamohlaka, J. (eds.) ICT and Society. IFIP
Advances in Information and Communication Technology, vol. 431, pp. 107–121. Springer,
Heidelberg (2014)

16. Boulton, A., Brunn, S.D., Devriendt, L.: Cyberinfrastructures and ‘smart’ world cities:
physical, human and soft infrastructures. In: Derudder, B., Hoyler, M., Taylor, P.J., Witlox,
F. (eds.) International Handbook of Globalization and World Cities, p. 198. Edward Elgar,
Northampton (2011)

17. Chourabi, H., et al.: Understanding smart cities: an integrative framework. In: 2012 45th

Hawaii International Conference on System Science (HICSS), IEEE (2012)

18. Partridge, H.L.: Developing a human perspective to the digital divide in the ‘smart city’

(2004)

19. Bowerman, B., et al.: The vision of a smart city. In: 2nd International Life Extension

Technology Workshop, Paris (2000)

20. Caragliu, A., Del Bo, C., Nijkamp, P.: Smart cities in Europe. J. Urban Technol. 18(2), 65–

82 (2011)

21. Kehoe, M., et al.: Smarter cities series: a foundation for understanding IBM smarter cities.

Redguides for Business Leaders, IBM (2011)

22. Anttiroiko, A.-V., Valkama, P., Bailey, S.J.: Smart cities in the new service economy:

building platforms for smart services. AI Soc. 29(3), 323–334 (2014)

23. Gifﬁnger, R., et al.: Smart cities-ranking of European medium-sized cities. Vienna

University of Technology (2007)

24. Washburn, D., et al.: Helping CIOs understand “smart city” initiatives: deﬁning the smart
city, its drivers, and the role of the CIO, Forrester Research, Inc., Cambridge, MA (2010)
25. Su, K., Li, J., Fu, H.: Smart city and the applications. In: 2011 International Conference on

Electronics, Communications and Control (ICECC), IEEE (2011)

26. Piro, G., et al.: Information centric services in smart cities. J. Syst. Softw. 88, 169–188

(2014)

27. Naphade, M.: Smarter cities and their innovation challenges. Computer 44(6), 32–39 (2011)
28. Singh, S.: Smart cities: a $1.5 trillion market opportunity. Forbes, Editor, Forbes blog (2014)
29. Al-Hader, M., et al.: Smart city components architecture. In: International Conference on

Computational Intelligence, Modelling and Simulation 2009, CSSim 2009, IEEE (2009)

30. Baskin, C., Barker, M., Woods, P.: Towards a smart community: rethinking the strategic use

of ICTs in teaching and learning. Australas. J. Edu. Technol. 19(2), 192–210 (2003)

31. Roitman, H., et al.: Harnessing the crowds for smart city sensing. In: Proceedings of the 1st

International Workshop on Multimodal Crowd Sensing, ACM (2012)

32. Roberts, J.C.: State of the art: coordinated & multiple views in exploratory visualization. In:
Fifth International Conference on Coordinated and Multiple Views in Exploratory
Visualization 2007, CMV 2007, IEEE (2007)

33. Convertino, G., et al.: Exploring context switching and cognition in dual-view coordinated
International Conference on Coordinated and Multiple Views in

visualizations.
Exploratory Visualization 2003, Proceedings, IEEE (2003)

In:

Supporting Smart Community Decision Making for Self-governance

143

34. de Barros Pereira, H.B.: Análisis experimental de los criterios de evaluación de usabilidad de
aplicaciones multimedia en entornos de educación y formación a distancia. Universitat
Politècnica de Catalunya (2002)

35. Baloian, N., Frez, J., Zurita, G.: Smart cities: supporting citizen participation in city

planning. In: Proceedings of the CSIT, Yerevan Armenia (2013)

36. Guerrero, L., Ochoa, S., Pino, J.A., Collazos, C.: Selecting computing devices to support

mobile collaboration. Group Decis. Negot. 15(3), 243–271 (2006)

