Exploring Collaboration in the Realm of Virtual Museums

Nelson Baloian1(✉), Wolfram Luther2, Daniel Biella2, Nare Karapetyan3,
José A. Pino1, Tobias Schreck4, Andres Ferrada1, and Nancy Hitschfeld1

1 Department of Computer Science, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile

{nbaloian,jpino,nancy}@dcc.uchile.cl
2 University of Duisburg-Essen, Duisburg, Germany

{wolfram.luther,daniel.biella}@uni-due.de

3 American University of Armenia, Yerevan, Armenia

nkarapetyan@aua.am

4 Graz University of Technology, Graz, Austria

tobias.schreck@cgv.tugraz.at

Abstract.  Virtual museums have been very popular since the early days of the
World Wide Web and many scientiﬁc works have been published on this topic.
Although the rich variety of possibilities for supporting collaboration among the
users of virtual museums, today very few implementations oﬀer support for such
kind of activities. This paper aims at settling the value of collaboration in virtual
museums by means of depicting and classifying collaborative organization and
co-curation activities in establishing, designing, planning, realizing, operating,
deploying and visiting a virtual exhibition applying action research. As a use case,
we present ongoing work to realize a virtual museum devoted to Armenian cross
stones (Khachkars).
Keywords: Virtual museums · Taxonomy of collaborative activities

1

Introduction

A virtual museum VM is a software artifact that presents a reconstruction of physical
museums or parts of them; it displays digital reconstructions or born digital art in an
exhibition, room and museum setting. Hazan et al. [4] deﬁne a VM as “a communication
product accessible by a public, focused on tangible or intangible heritage. It uses various
forms of interactivity and immersion, for the purpose of education, research, enjoyment,
and  enhancement  of  visitor  experience.  VMs  may  be  typically  but  not  exclusively
denoted as electronic when they could be called online museums, hyper museum, digital
museum, cyber museums or Web museums”.

The  realization  of  a  VM  goes  on  in  several  stages:  Establishing,  designing,
constructing, running, and operating a VM within its lifespan. Diﬀerent skills are needed
from people working on these various stages; even for one stage, several persons may
be  related  to  it.  Main  roles  are  curators,  software  engineers,  instructors,  architects,
experts, sponsors/authorities, and visitors; the latter ones may be museum enthusiasts,
special user groups, tourists, students, etc.

© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
C. Gutwin et al. (Eds.): CRIWG 2017, LNCS 10391, pp. 252–259, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-63874-4_19

Exploring Collaboration in the Realm of Virtual Museums

253

Collaboration in virtual museums has not been explored as much as it should, despite
the various interesting possibilities which were highlighted in [1] already in the year
2001. Therefore, in this work, we would like to focus on collaboration possibilities
involving stakeholders with diﬀerent roles in the process of creation, administration and
visiting a virtual museum.

2 Collaboration in a Virtual Museum

We focus on  interdisciplinary  collaboration; no  contribution  to collaboration inside
groups is intended. The stakeholders concerned in the collaborative co-curation process
encompass  the  coordination  of  group  building,  task  allocation,  motivation  of  team
members, communication in the context of collaborative evaluation and testing, knowl‐
edge generation and problem solving via information processing in the creating and
visiting process of virtual exhibitions.

Group members are often distributed across a wide area; they constitute a multidis‐
ciplinary, multi-professional team. Individuals have various motivations and goals when
working together. Co-curation within the generation process is paired with collaboration
during a visit to an exhibition. Sacher et al. [7] explain: “The generated data from
collaboration  can  range  from  visitor’s  annotations  or  comments  regarding  speciﬁc
exhibits up to complete exhibit models and room (re-)designs created in a virtual envi‐
ronment. … Collaboration (in virtual environments) is implemented as users being colocated 
in the VM, which enables information exchange and awareness of user actions
via face-to-face communication.” Recently, a new metadata standard and new modeling
language  for  virtual  museums,  the  VM  and  Cultural  Object  Exchange  Format
(ViMCOX) has been developed in order to provide a semantic structure for exhibits and
complete museums [8]. It combines community contributions  to administrative and
descriptive metadata with technical and use metadata provided by the institution oper‐
ating the museum. This partition implies the following classiﬁcation:
• Level 1: Organizational collaboration
• Level 2: Descriptive process-related collaboration, i.e. co-curation

Level 1: Communication about the nature of the problem (classiﬁcation, identifying
and describing the problem solving approach, depicting the process workﬂow: hier‐
archical description and generative metadata-based process modeling, call for crowd‐
sourcing). Coordination: team composition (team description & parameter selection,
e.g., team size and structure, task distribution, crowd participation, motivation, remu‐
neration), evaluation planning, etc. [5].

Level 2: Co-curation activities: Exhibition space design (designing VM, exposi‐
tions – spatial, metaphoric design, software tools, metadata acquisition, tour plan‐
ning, interaction design), information processing (created, used, modified), commu‐
nication/interaction (various forms of communication and interaction between group
members as well as persons and items during the whole collaborative co-curation
process – formal description, mode, technical parameters like frequency, quantity,
reliability, intent [10]).

254

N. Baloian et al.

The collaborative work of promoters, curators, and intended users mainly concerns
communication and coordination on level one including motivation, aim, need, team
building and further administrative tasks. Sacher [8] suggests the use of a conception
matrix linking issues, curators and other groups like team building & experts; room
design, installation & architects, software engineers; themes & sponsors; presentation
goals & museums’ enthusiasts; administrative tasks & experts. Activities are in detail:
• Thematic classiﬁcation, content conception, motivation, need.
• Team building.
• Reviewing old exhibitions.
• General design consideration – participatory design.
• Artwork selection and maintenance throughout its lifecycle (incl. metadata).
• Gathering of spatial constraints.
• Administrative tasks: ﬁnancing, regulations, rights, insurances.
• Monitoring the museum narrative, conﬂict management and tool support.

2.1 Designing and Planning the Virtual Museum
In level two as deﬁned above, the major challenges in the collaborative work process
faced by curators and software engineers are collaborative problem solving and infor‐
mation processing. This includes the creation of sketches, drawings, mind maps, story‐
boards, plans and models with respect to the following issues:
• creation  of  exhibition  space  designs  and  digitization/selection  of  exhibit:  it
involves the crafting or selecting of room models, buildings and outdoor areas as
well as their connectors,

• import of metadata instances, collection and positioning of artifacts, interactive/

animated exhibits, content and information,

• ﬂoor planning and tasks layout, metaphorical design: ground plan, lighting, wall
layout, guiding visitors, i.e. navigation aids. Spatial parameters and architecture can
inﬂuence content and form of the digitized content, thus re-scaling may be necessary,
• presentation, publication and dissemination: virtual exhibition/museum (local/
web), selection of widgets and input/output peripherals, HUD (minimap), monitor,
projector,  keyboard,  touch,  gamepad  or  other  VR  devices.  Preview  on-the-ﬂy
utilizing various navigation modes and avatar sizes, exhibition catalog, archiving
construction plan, archiving user behavior.
To support metadata-based content construction, in our application example of a
Khachkar  museum  we  have  to  build  a  XML-formatted  list  of  Khachkars  with  the
following metadata: Name/item, century, master, style, ornaments at the bottom, back
side, text, motif, size, purpose for erection, ﬁrst location/monastery, actual location,
function, surrounding, stone parameters, source, etc.

Among the many tools for collaborative software development there is gitlab [9],
which  integrates  a  complete  workﬂow  from  writing  down  an  idea,  issue  tracking,
commenting, planning, code managing, documentation to testing, reviewing, deploy‐
ment and feedback management. Tools like issue trackers, wikis, distributed software

Exploring Collaboration in the Realm of Virtual Museums

255

repositories with version control, continuous software integration servers, and deploy‐
ment engines have already existed before but gitlab makes all of these accessible in a
single web-based platform.

Gitlab’s features are not limited to software development but can also be used for
the conﬁguration management. The built-in user management allows the assignment of
curators and software developers to the roles they need to plan, design, code, and eval‐
uate a VM in a distributed and collaborative environment.

2.2 Constructing the Virtual Museum
This stage concerns the following tasks for software engineers, curators, the crowd,
museum enthusiasts and experts in the context of co-curation in galleries, libraries,
archives and museums (GLAM) with the aim of using the inspiration/expertise of nonprofessional 
curators to create exhibitions:
• Digital 2D/3D model creation: Digitization and reconstruction of Armenian Khach‐
kars  mainly  done  by  students  and  anonymous  collaborators  in  a  crowdsourcing
modality, collection of metadata, artwork description and classiﬁcation respecting
the ViMCOX standard with the aid of experts.

• Design of artwork settings: Placement in appropriate surroundings with respect to

typical arrangements.

• Web-based interface for checking and transferring artworks, metadata and rights.
• Various presentation modes using WIMP or post WIMP interaction devices.
• Attendant evaluation and requirement validation during the whole workﬂow.

2.3 Operating the Virtual Museum
This stage encompasses contributions by various user groups, engaged visitors, instruc‐
tors, and the use of reconstruction software and collaborative tools: Tour selection,
construction  and  publication,  metadata-based  artwork  linking,  knowledge  creation
(aﬀecting  creator,  époque,  original-replica  discussion,  style,  material,  dedication,
inscription  etc.),  interactive  artifact  (de)construction,  storytelling,  collaborative
scenarios with shared workspaces.
• Commenting, improving and publishing (e-guest book opportunity, evaluating
visitor’s annotations or comments regarding speciﬁc exhibits, exhibit models manip‐
ulation or completion, considering room (re-)designs elaborated in a virtual envi‐
ronment, publishing individual tours and preferential artwork [2].

• Navigation and interaction (proposing, tours, points of interest, interacting with
artifacts,  changing  their  geometry,  scaling,  translation,  rotation  or  changing  the
internal structure).

• Institutional collaboration utilizing standardized metadata from other museums or

experts as well as social media integration.

• Technological  progress  in  VM  generation,  new  presentation  forms,  museum
instances operated by multiple users and attendant evaluation should contribute to a
virtual museum lifecycle in the long term.

256

N. Baloian et al.

3 A Collaborative Virtual Khachkar Museum

As stated in the first section, we began this long-term research with an action research
approach. For this purpose we have already developed an application which implements
virtual 3D environment in which curators can set up Khachkars exhibitions in a collabora‐
tive way and visitors can explore them interacting in various ways with the curators and
other  visitors.  The  application  was  developed  using  the  Unity  framework,  originally
intended for developing 3D collaborative games. It was chosen given its versatility to
include various types of 3D models, the way it allows users to navigate and interact with
the created environments (including multi-user features) and the fact that the created appli‐
cation can be exported to web format.

Before developing the actual application we had to build a library of Khachkars which
would be available for curators in order to create their expositions. For the first stage of the
work we selected about 80 stones according to this criterion: they must be easily reached,
there is some interesting data available about them, and they should be of various styles,
ages and regions. We used mainly two different methods: the first one was a lightweight
approach, in which photographs are taken from the front, back, two lateral sides and from
above. Then a graphic model is created “by hand”. The second is taking a set of photo‐
graphs covering a 360 degrees view and reconstructing the 3D view using online services
like MeshLab.

In  order  to  add  a  stone  to  the  application’s  library,  metadata  should  be  provided
according to the description in Sect. 2.1. There is also the possibility to add text to explain
some particular characteristic of the stone. All this information will be used by the appli‐
cation and shown to curators and visitors by request. A ground perspective of this work is
that the addition of new Khachkars to the library remains open to additions during the
museum’s lifecycle using a crowdsourcing modality.

A new exposition is created by entering the name and a short description about what
is intended to show with it. Then a main menu lets curators choose the scenario where
the exposition will be deployed. Currently there are ﬁve options: a countryside, which
has two variants, with or without a church on the background, a wall with niches where
the stones can be put, an alley and on a rocky mountainside. These are the most typical
settings in which Khachkars can be found in the real world (Fig. 1).

Fig. 1. Access to Khachkar formations and arrangements

Exploring Collaboration in the Realm of Virtual Museums

257

Then, a collaborative workspace is accessed in which the chosen scenario is shown
without any stone. At the left hand side there appears a scrollable menu with all the
available stones which have been previously digitized and included in the Khachkars
library of the application (Fig. 2).

Fig. 2. Curators’ collaborative environment

Curators can place a stone in the chosen scenario by dragging it from the icons
menu and dropping it on the chosen scenario. They can also re-arrange the original
setting by rotating and moving the stones. Various awareness elements have been
incorporated into this workspace to support the collaborative work among co-cura‐
tors.  One  of  them  is  the  set  of  icons  representing  each  one  of  them,  which  is
surrounded by a frame of a particular distinctive color. When one curator is working
with a particular stone on the scenario (e.g., by moving it) this is highlighted with the
color associated to the curator’s icon.

The most basic interaction for visitors to the exposition is by clicking on each stone
and seeing its metadata. A more elaborated interaction with the application is the imple‐
mentation of suggested “viewpoints” which can be used indistinctively by visitors and
curators.  Navigation  in  3D  environments  can  sometimes  be  diﬃcult,  especially  for
beginners, and they may miss some interesting characteristics of the exhibition. In order
to help visitors not to miss a certain important view of the exposition curators can include
points of view in it, by saving a certain location and view orientation in the scene. These
points of view will be shown as avatars in the form of human silhouettes when a person
visits the exhibit (Fig. 3).

Clicking on an avatar, the visitor’s view will be “teleported” to that location. Each
“viewpoint” has a blog associated in which the author can explain the reason for visiting
it and visitors can leave comments and feedbacks.

258

N. Baloian et al.

Fig. 3. A scene with viewpoints shown as human silhouettes

Based  on  experiences  in  former  projects  [6,  7],  we  will  make  an  evaluation
concerning establishment, design, and system realization. This evaluation will take into
account the viewpoints of all relevant stakeholders [11].

4 Conclusions

Collaboration is fundamental to ensure quality and limit costs in building and operating
virtual museums. This paper proposes a two-tier classiﬁcation of collaborative group
activities framing the creation process and use of virtual exhibitions. It highlights a new
interdisciplinary project devoted to the realization of a virtual Khachkar museum. The
paper also presents a preliminary development of a virtual museum which implements
most of the activities mentioned in this classiﬁcation. This implementation will allow
us to conduct further research about the way stakeholders of a virtual museum would
beneﬁt  from  cooperating  inside  the  environment  by  introducing  this  tool  in  the
community. For this purpose, we have already made the relevant contacts with experts
in the area of Armenian ancient architecture and art, including Khachkars, and we have
their commitment to support the testing. Further work should examine intergroup and
intra-group collaboration, the automatized co-curation and GLAM as special form of
crowdsourcing, create a worldwide motivating and remuneration concept, and address
the question of how we could measure and rate collaboration with respect to the various
quoted forms [3].

References

1. Barbieri, T., Paolini, P.: Cooperation metaphors for virtual museums. In: Museums and the

Web 2001, pp. 115–126. Archives & Museum Informatics, Pittsburgh (2001)

Exploring Collaboration in the Realm of Virtual Museums

259

2. Biella,  D.,  Pilz,  T.,  Sacher,  D.,  Weyers,  B.,  Luther,  W.,  Baloian,  N.,  Schreck,  T.:
Crowdsourcing and co-curation in virtual museums: a practice-driven approach. J. Univers.
Comput. Sci. 22(10), 1277–1297 (2016)

3. Chounta,  I.-A.,  Avouris,  N.:  Towards  a  time  series  approach  for  the  classiﬁcation  and

evaluation of collaborative activities. Comput. Inform. 34, 588–614 (2015)

4. Hazan et al.: (2014). http://www.v-must.net/virtual-museums/what-virtual-museum
5. Ostergaard, K.J., Summers, J.D.: Development of a systematic classiﬁcation and taxonomy

of collaborative design activities. J. Eng. Des. 20(1), 57–81 (2009)

6. Sacher, D., et al.: The Virtual Leopold Fleischhacker Museum (2013). http://mw2013.museums

andtheweb.com/paper/the-virtual-leopold-fleischhacker-museum/

7. Sacher, D., Weyers, B., Kuhlen, T.W., Luther, W.: An integrative tool chain for collaborative
virtual museums in immersive virtual environments. In: Baloian, N., Zorian, Y., Taslakian,
P., Shoukouryan, S. (eds.) CRIWG 2015. LNCS, vol. 9334, pp. 86–94. Springer, Cham (2015).
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-22747-4_7

8. Sacher,  D.:  A  generative  approach  to  virtual  museums  using  a  new  metadata  format:  a
curators’,  visitors’  and  software  engineers’  perspective.  Ph.D.  dissertation,  University  of
Duisburg-Essen (2017)

9. The Platform for Modern Developers. https://about.gitlab.com/
10. Herskovic, V., Ochoa, S., Pino, J.A., Neyem, A.: The iceberg eﬀect: behind the user interface

of mobile collaborative systems. J. Univers. Comput. Sci. 17(2), 183–201 (2011)

11. Antunes, P., Herskovic, V., Ochoa, S., Pino, J.A.: Structuring dimensions for collaborative

systems evaluation. ACM Comput. Surv. 44(2) (2012). Paper 8

