A Platform Supporting the Implementation of 
Collaborative Learning through Participatory 

Simulations 

Gustavo Zurita1, Nelson Baloian2, Felipe Baytelman1,  

Antonio Farias1, and Pedro Antunes3 

1 Universidad de Chile, Management Control and Information Systems Department,  

Business School, Diagonal Paraguay 257, Santiago, Chile 

gnzurita@fen.uchile.cl, fbaytelmanp@fen.uchile.cl, 

anfari@fen.uchile.cl 

2 Universidad de Chile, Computer Science Departments – Engineering School, Blanco  

Encalada 2120, Santiago, Chile 
nbaloian@dcc.uchile.cl 

3 University of Lisbon, Department of Informatics, Faculty of Sciences, Bloco C6,  

Campo Grande, 1700 Lisbon, Portugal 

paa@di.fc.ul.pt 

Abstract. Student motivation is a key aspect in achieving successful collaborative 
learning. In the past, some techniques which help to engage the students in 
a motivating learning activity have been proposed. Among them, Participatory 
Simulation is one of the newest. In Participatory Simulations, social interaction 
and  motivational  effects  are  the  main  facilitators.  In  this  work,  we  present  an 
easy-to-use  framework  that  facilitates  the  development  of  mobile  computing 
applications  implementing  this  technique.  The  use  of  this  framework  leads  to 
the  development  of  lightweight  peer-to-peer  applications  for  handheld  computers 
with interfaces fully based on pen interaction, and designed to work with 
handhelds over an ad-hoc wireless network. This paper also  shows the development 
of an application oriented toward the last-year  business school undergraduate 
students  for support in learning the concepts of reputation and trust 
based on the customer’s experience and knowledge generated by a company’s 
performance during a good or bad experience. 

Keywords: Handhelds, gestures, sketches, collaborative learning, participatory 
simulation. 

1   Introduction 

The learning value of collaborative participatory simulations may stem from students 
having  “rich  conceptual  resources  for  reasoning  about,  and  thoughtfully  acting  in, 
playful and motivational spaces, and thus can more easily become highly engaged in 
the  subject  matter”,  [10].  Participatory  simulations  use  the  availability  of  a  mobile 
computing  device  that  gives  each  student  the  capability  of  simple  data  exchanges 

W. Shen et al. (Eds.): CSCWD 2007, LNCS 5236, pp. 523–533, 2008. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008 

524 

G. Zurita et al. 

among neighboring devices [17], [5]. They enable students to act as agents in simulations 
 in  which  overall  patterns  emerge  from  local  decisions  and  information  exchanges.
  Students  can  then  use  those  simulations  to  model  and  learn  about  several 
types of phenomena [5] in order to improve their knowledge about human behaviors, 
to help them in solving conflicts, to shape interaction protocols between humans, and 
to learn some aspects of collective  management,  games and experimental economic 
situations. Furthermore, the interest in participatory simulations related to experimental 
economics and management is part of a growing trend [3], [4], [8]. 

Some research groups have implemented participatory simulations with handhelds 
and infrared beaming [15], and it  has been  found that this kind of activity provides 
several advantages in teaching and learning: (a) it introduces an effective instructional 
tool and has the potential to impact student learning positively in all curricular topics 
and instructional activities [16], (b) it increases motivation [11], [5], and (c) it generates 
positive effects in engagement, self-directed learning and problem-solving. [11]. 
The  growing  acceptance  of  handhelds  enables  users  to  take  advantage  of  numerous 
advantages in scenarios that desktop computing cannot provide, [11]. One of a hand-
held’s  most  natural  data-entry  modes  is  the  stylus  (a.k.a.  a  pen-based  or  freehand-
input-based system), which imitates the mental model of using pen and paper, thereby 
letting users easily rough out their ideas and/or activate different functionalities like 
copy,  move,  delete,  etc.  [13].  However,  most  currently  available  handheld  applications 
adopt the PC application approach that uses widgets (buttons, menus, windows) 
instead of freehand-input-based paradigms (via touch screens) and/or sketching, [8]. 

This paper proposes a framework for implementing Participatory Simulations, having 
two general research goals: (a) to propose a conceptual framework for specifying 
(by the teacher) and developing applications in the field of participative simulations 
supporting  motivating  learning  applications,  and  (b)  to  determine  the  feasibility  of 
using this in an undergraduate curricular contexts, both in terms of intended and real 
learning  outcomes,  particularly  in  the  management  area.  An  instance  of  the  framework 
is described. Its implementation is simple, lightweight and fully based on handhelds 
wirelessly interconnected to an ad-hoc network. 

2   Participatory Simulations 

A Participatory Simulation is a role-playing activity that helps explain the coherence 
of complex and dynamic systems. The system maps a problem of the real world in a 
model with a fixed number of roles and rules. Global knowledge and patterns emerge 
in  Participatory  Simulations  from  local  interactions  among  users  and  decisionmaking.
  The impact is understood by an analysis and observation while doing and/or 
at the end of the activity.  

An  advantage  of  Participatory  Simulations  is  that  the  activity  is  highly  effective 
and motivating even in large groups. A teacher may or may not start with an introduction 
where he or she explains the relevant theoretical parts of the complex problem. 
At least the roles and rules need to be clearly specified. The students should understand 
the possible activities and consequences, which are available in the simulation 
at the end. The exchange of experiences and a discussion in small groups during or 
after the simulation help increase the understanding of the simulated reality. 

 

A Platform Supporting the Implementation of Collaborative 

525 

Short or longer Participatory Simulations can be integrated in the lecture, where a 
major idea is the concept of learning by doing, [12]. Students participate in an active 
and motivating way, analyze information, exchange information, make decisions and 
see the outcome of their actions. 

3   Related Work 

Simulations were conducted with paper and pencil in the past, but the technological 
advances  made  a  completely  new  type  of  simulation  possible.  The  ‘participatory’ 
aspect of these simulations can be directly facilitated by the technology, which provides 
support to the roles and rules to be distributed among the students. Researchers 
are highly interested in Participatory Simulations as these simulations appear to make 
very difficult ideas about ‘distributed systems’ and ‘emergent behavior’ more accessible 
 to  students,  [17].  Furthermore,  the  Participatory  Simulation  embeds  student 
engagement and motivation in a playful social space [5] where they have rich conceptual 
resources for reasoning about, and thoughtfully acting in, playful spaces, and thus 
can  more  easily  become  highly  engaged  in  the  subject  matter.  Different  hardware 
devices  were  used  to  support  Participatory  Simulations  on  various  kinds  of  educational 
objectives for students of different educative levels: 
•  A  futures  trading  simulation,  which  can  be  used  to  teach  concepts  of  a  fu-
tures/options  or  financial  markets,  is  described  in  [2].  The  futures  trading  is  a 
spreadsheet program designed to minimize required input by the instructor. Student 
survey responses demonstrate that the simulation is a success.  

•  Thinking Tags, [1] small nametag-sized computers that communicate with each 
other.  Andrews  et  al.  (2003) built  an  application  for  kindergarten  children;  and 
[6] for high-school students in a simulation of virus propagation and asked them 
to determine the rules of the propagation. The tag communicates with other tags, 
exchanges data and visualizes similar preferences of two persons. 

•  Klopfer et al. [11] showed that the newer and more easily distributable version of 
Participatory  Simulations  on  handhelds  was  as  equally  capable  as  the  original 
Tag-based  simulations  in  engaging  students  collaboratively  in  a  complex  prob-
lem-solving  task.  They  feel  that  handheld  technology  holds  great  promise  for 
promoting collaborative learning as teachers struggle to find authentic ways to integrate 
 technology  into  the  classroom,  in  addition  to  engaging  and  motivating 
students to learn science.  

•  A  Participatory  Simulation  in  the  form  of  a  stock  exchange  was  designed  for 
master’s  students  in  financial  theory,  using  architectures  based  on  a  server  and 
clients running on desktop PCs or laptops as well as on PDAs, [12]. 

•  The SimCafé experiments form part of the sociological approach, aiming at validating 
 and  consolidating  models,  [8].  In  this  approach,  participants  are  stakeholders 
 and  the  witnesses  of  the  emergence  are  domain  experts,  usually  social 
scientists. Participatory Simulations are used as a tool to determine the condition 
of the emergence. As a matter of fact, this approach belongs to the experimental 
approach in social sciences, [4] especially experimental economics. 

526 

G. Zurita et al. 

Based  on  the  above-mentioned  literature,  we  have  identified  that  no  system  has  yet 
been  proposed  or  implemented  for  handhelds  in  a  wireless  ad-hoc  network  using  a 
pen-based interface as the main metaphor for user interaction. 

4   Developing a Framework 

Foundational concepts underpinning the design and use of Participatory Simulations 
include (a) immersion of students in simulations of complex phenomena; (b) development 
 of  inquiry  and  research  design  skills  by  the  reflections  and  analysis  of  the 
simulation; (c) negotiation, coordination and alignment of individual local behavior in 
order to foster group-level systems understanding. 

Participatory Simulations with handhelds offer an additional perspective by providing offscreen,
  first-person  experience  and  insight  into  the  dynamics  and  emergent  behavior,  as 
students become agents in a complex system. Information and conceptual knowledge circulates 
through peer-to-peer interaction by the interchange and negotiation of objects, which 
takes different forms in each simulation.  

We propose a conceptual framework for the specification, design and creation of 
mobile  learning  Participatory  Simulations  based  on  wirelessly  interconnected  handhelds 
 (Figure  1).  In  order  to  generate,  specify  and  implement  Participatory  Simulation 
applications, the Teacher must define: (a) learning goals of the reality simulated, (b) artifacts 
to be interchanged, b) behavior variables and parameters, and (c) rules and roles for 
playing the simulation (see section 6). Goals (Figure 1) need to be identified in order to let 
students  successfully  learn/construct  certain  knowledge.  These  goals  may  include 
 

Fig. 1. Conceptual framework  

 

 

A Platform Supporting the Implementation of Collaborative 

527 

meta-objectives and they are only a means to achieve an overall learning objective. 
Roles and rules are spread among students when the activity begins, but the teacher 
can interact, too. He or she can always access and modify simulation details: wireless 
connectivity lets the teacher alter any role or rule in the simulation in real-time, 
thus changing behaviors on the go. In order to configure the system for a Participatory 
 Simulation,  the  Teacher  may  set  up  transferable  objects  (artifacts),  their  behavior 
 parameters,  rules  and  participant  roles.  Then,  to  begin  the  activity,  the 
teacher  explains  the  goal  of  the  activity  to  the  students,  also  describing  objects, 
rules and roles, and how these concepts are represented in their handhelds. Rules, 
roles and goals should be designed to achieve (a) a high  social interaction among 
students, (b) negotiation instances, and (c) competition to encourage an active and 
motivated stance as if students were playing a game, [12]. 

If students require assistance, our framework allows the teacher to give them wireless 
 feedback  and  assessment.  The  teacher  can  (a)  observe  the  simulation  state  of 
each participant device and (b) modify such state in order to respond to the student's 
inquiry. 

Start-up set-up must ensure that students always play an active and dynamic role 
over time. This should be based on trading between students (Negotiation component 
of Students, and Interchange Objects in Fig. 1), or automatically among handhelds 
(Exchange Objects). These conditions depend on each Participatory Simulation application 
construction, and may involve the following aspects: (a) type of exchangeable 
objects,  (b)  exchange  amounts,  (c)  trade  conditions,  (d)  parameters  before  and  after 
the  exchange,  and  (e)  exchangeable  objects.  Once  the  simulation  concludes,  the 
teacher  must  guide  students’  understanding  about  the  activity.  In  this  way,  the  students 
will construct the learning objective together. 

5   Principles of the Interface 

Pen-Based User Interface (PUI). According to  [13] and [7],  a handheld application 
interface must imitate the pen-and-paper metaphor so users can interact naturally with 
the  computer  in  varied  situations,  especially  when  they  are  or  need  to  be  in  movement,
 thus freeing them to concentrate on the tasks at hand instead of worrying about 
the interface (interaction with keys, menus, widgets, etc.). A pen-based system offers 
a  more natural and intuitive interface that  facilitates the sharing and exchange, thus 
improving efficiency. 

Gestures. Essential to the  functioning of PUI is the use of gestures, [14]. In  [9], a 
survey  intended  to  illuminate  the  problems  and  benefits  users  experience  with  ges-
tures-PUI,  it  was  found  that  the  most  frequent  actions  were  deleting,  selecting  and 
moving, and that users consider these actions to be an efficient form of interaction, as 
well  as  convenient,  easy  to  learn,  utilize  and  remember,  and  potentially  an  added 
advantage for the interface. 

Mobility in physical spaces and interchanging objects on the fly. Handhelds are an 
appropriate  technology  for  providing  high  mobility  and  portability,  and  for  creating 
ad-hoc networks through peer-to-peer connections between already incorporated WiFi 
components (Dell Axim X50). Such network allows deliberate information exchange 

528 

G. Zurita et al. 

between users, as well as automatic interaction between devices (see section 7). Proximity 
detection is done with infrared sensors (IrDA) combined with WiFi. 

6   A Scenario for Participatory Simulation 

In this section, we describe an instance of the framework proposed in section 5. It is 
oriented  toward  last-year  business  school  undergraduate  students  and  is  related  to 
concepts like reputation and trust. 

Trust is based on the customer’s experience and knowledge generated by a com-
pany’s performance during a good or bad experience. Repetitive interaction between a 
customer and a company is required to generate positive trust. This positive evaluation 
 usually  occurs  when  product  quality  is  satisfactory  or  even  when  the  company 
reacts appropriately after a client’s complaint about bad products (or services). 

Companies  achieve  a  reputation  when  their  customers  trust  in  common  transactions.
 With a good reputation, a company may attract new customers, even when they 
do not have a previous common experience: It only requires previously satisfied customers 
to communicate their trust and perceived reputation in the company to another 
consumer. 

These concepts must be learned by students who should be able, during the participatory 
 simulation,  to  generate,  communicate  and/or  perceive  positive  trust  (good 
products)  or  negative  trust  (bad  products)  generated  during  transactions  with  each 
company.  Products  acquired  will  have  a  perceptible  life  span  directly  connected  to 
their quality. If a product lasts as long as the company offered, it will be considered a 
good  product.  Customers  may  claim  bad  products  to  the  company.  Simulation  requires 
students to play company and customer roles where customer-students: 
• 

are  required  to  acquire  a  basket  of  goods,  and  to  replace  products  when  they 
expire. 
initially  have  no  knowledge  about  a  company's  reputation,  but  they  may  query 
and share such information with other customers, without restrictions. 
•  may choose to acquire a product from any company that produces it. 
•  may claim a cash refund or product replacement when products fail before reach-

• 

ing the offered lifetime. 

Company-students will: 
• 
• 
• 

offer homogeneous goods, with static prices and life span defined by the teacher. 
generate new product units periodically. 
freely  advertise  the  products’  features  to  customers.  Even  when  a  company 
knows its products expected lifetime, it may advertise it with a different duration 
in order to manage customer expectations. 
agree or not agree to refund or replace a failing product at the customer's request. 

• 
A  student  ranking  will  be  published  in  order  to  keep  the  simulation  highly  active. 
Such ranking will list purchase requirements and optimal cash spending for customerstudents 
and money earned for company-students. 

When  the  simulation  finishes,  students  must  analyze  these  results  and  conclude 

whether: 

 

A Platform Supporting the Implementation of Collaborative 

529 

•  There are companies with a bad reputation that may nonetheless achieve good results. 
•  Customers with previous knowledge have a clear advantage as compared to those 

who don’t.  

Even  though  it  looks  beneficial  for  a  company  to  swindle  a  customer  (even  for  the 
first time), in the short term, that customer will not do business again with the company 
 and  may  probably  convince  other  customers  not  to.  In  this  scenario,  students 
may  recognize  two  cases:  (a)  the  company  reduces  its  earnings  or  (b)  the  company 
had intentions to quit its market, so it will not be affected by customers’ reactions. 

7   An Application Using the Framework 

We have implemented a lightweight platform for the creation of participatory simulation 
applications  based  on  the  framework  proposed  in  section  4.  Using  this  platform,  we 
have successfully implemented an application for the scenario proposed in the previous 
section.  This  application  allows  the  teacher  to  assign  roles  to  each  participant.  Such 
roles are "customer" and "vendor.." Also, the teacher can create "goods," and let "ven-
dors" produce them or "consumers" need them. This will encourage different "vendors" 
and "consumers" to interact with each other in order to succeed in the goal of their role. 

7.1   Simulation Management 

Role assignment. Our participatory simulation system allows the teacher to assign a 
role  to  each  student.  Under  the  "activity  administration"  mode,  unassigned  students 
are displayed in the middle of the screen over a white area. The right area of handhelds 
(Fig. 2.a) has “vendors” while the left belongs to “consumers.." The teacher can 
drag a student icon to one side or another in order to assign the roles (Fig. 2.a). In this 
way, the teacher can see who has been assigned to a certain role by looking at different 
screen areas. The teacher can drag any participant icon from one side to another at 
any time in order to reassign the selected participant to the new role. 

Fig.  2.  a)  Teacher  drags  a  student  icon  into  the  “vendor”  area  to  assign  him  a  new  role.  b) 
Teacher can create new goods using free-hand drawings. 

 

530 

G. Zurita et al. 

Goods design. The teacher can define different goods to be produced and required by 
the students. In order to do this, he or she has to work under the "Goods administra-
tion" mode. Here, the teacher can draw a sketch of a certain good and surround it by a 
rectangle. This will produce a "good icon,," displaying an awareness of a successful 
creation and a reduced icon of the original sketch in the bottom bound of the screen. 
Then, additional "goods icons" may be created, as seen in Fig. 2.b.  

Double-clicking on a "goods icon" will bring up a screen to define default variables 
for such goods. Instance variables are "original price,," "production time" and "product 
 expected  life.."    Each  different  "vendor"  capable  of  producing  these  goods  will 
assign  different  values  to  these  variables,  depending  on  a  global  "product  variance" 
variable, describing how strong this difference will be among all vendors. This variable 
can also be manipulated in this same screen.  

Goods management. Once "goods icons" have been created, they will show up in "activity 
administration mode" in the lower bound region of the screen. The teacher can drag 
these icons over vendor icons to allow them to produce this item, or over consumer icons 
to ask them to acquire this item. These goods assignments can be randomized in order to 
simplify the teacher's job and to ensure demand-supply equilibrium. 
Activity status and real-time management. Anytime before or during the activity, the 
teacher can enter a vendor (by double clicking on its icon). By doing this, he or she can 
check how well this vendor has performed and modify the goods he or she can produce. 
The teacher can drag additional products to allow additional production or remove producible 
goods by sketching a cross gesture over any goods icon or double-clicking it to 
see and control the product's instance variables specifically for that vendor. On the other 
hand, the teacher can also enter a customer and check his or her performance (feedback 
and assessment). The teacher can drag additional required products over the participant 
icon, or enter and sketch a cross gesture to remove pointed items from the requirements 
list.  On  the  customer  screen,  additional  information  about  goals  achieved  (required 
products already acquired) and pending products can be seen. 

7.2   Simulation Description 

Once  the  activity  teacher  has  set  up  the  simulation,  each  student  has  its  role  and  al-
lowed/required goods assigned. Hence, they can start seeking their goals: (a) vendors need to 
sell as much as they can, (b) while customers have to acquire every item on their requirement 
list. Vendors will start offering by shouting about how cheap and long-lasting their products 
are while customers will walk around searching for the cheapest item available. 

Customers may face vendors to acquire goods they sell. Vendors offer goods as if 
they would last for a certain period of time. After a customer acquires a product, it may 
last a certain period of time, shorter or longer than expected. If they last longer, they 
will get a good image of the vendor, and if they last less, a bad one. Once a customer 
faces another customer, they share information about a vendor’s reputation. Customers 
have  to  decide,  then,  whether  to  look  directly  for  vendors  and  save  time,  or  to  find 
about whose products are good or bad. 
Customer's screen. This screen is divided into 5 main areas: reputation viewer, trade 
zone,  requirements  list,  acquisition  list  and  score.  Reputation  viewer  depends  on 
whether another customer or a vendor is being faced. Trade zone (upper bound of the  

 

 

A Platform Supporting the Implementation of Collaborative 

531 

 

Fig. 3. Three steps in the trade process. First, the vendor offers a product; second, a customer 
accepts it; third, the vendor stock and customer requirements/acquired lists are updated. 

screen,  Fig.  3)  is  enabled  when  a  consumer  interacts  closely  with  a  vendor  (by  the 
IrDA sensors).  The requirement list displays goods which have not been acquired or 
have been acquired but already expired. the acquisition list displays both enabled and 
expired acquired items, showing expected life span and real life span. Items expired 
before the expected life span was reached are specially highlighted, encouraging customers 
to engage the vendor for an answer. Customers may click on acquired items to 
display  additional  information  about  them:  (a)  from  which  vendor  the  item  was  acquired,
 (b) how much time the vendor offered and how much time the product lasted. 
Clicking on the reputation viewer will show a reputation summary of all vendors that 
the current customer knows or has "heard of" from another customer. 
Vendor's  screen.  This  screen  is  simpler  than  the  customer's.  It  displays  what  goods  the 
students produce and the production rate, which products have already been produced and 
available stock. It also displays an icon representing current prestige among all customers, 
and a summary of the overall score.   
Students’  interactions.  At  the  beginning,  vendors'  reputations  are  unknown  to  customers.
  Every  vendor  starts  with  their  product  "factories"  and  maybe  an  instance  of 
each product. Customers start with an empty acquisition list and a set of requirements. 
When a customer faces a vendor closely, first the reputation display shows that ven-
dor's known reputation. If the customer has acquired a product before or if any other 
customer  has  shared  its  knowledge  about  this  vendor,  it  can  guide  the  user  as  to 
whether or not to trade with this vendor. A vendor can decide how much time he or she 
is going to offer for a product. The vendor is aware of the mean product life span, so a 

532 

G. Zurita et al. 

different (probably shorter) life span will be offered to each customer in order to ensure 
that the product will last at least N years (minutes in the simulation). In order to change 
the  offered  life  span,  the  vendor  can  double  click  on  a  product  to  enter  its  control 
screen. The system will suggest which items the vendor should offer by highlighting 
them. Then, the vendor has to drag an item into the trade area to offer it. As soon as 
this item is offered, it appears in the trade area on the customer's device screen. If the 
customer decides to buy the item, it has to be dragged from the trade area into the acquired 
items list. After a product is acquired, its life meter starts running, displaying 
how  long  the  product  has  been  enabled.  The  product  may  expire  after  or  before  the 
expected life span (the one offered by the vendor during the trade). As soon as it expires,
 a new item of the same kind is added to the customer's requirements list. In case 
the product has lasted the same time as, or longer than, what the vendor offered, the 
vendor  will  automatically  earn  a  better  reputation  ranking.  If  it  lasts  less  time,  the 
product will be marked as failed and the customer could return to the vendor in order 
to trade it back by dragging it back to the trade area. The vendor may return the money 
to the customer, which earns him a good reputation ranking, or argue. Depending on 
the outcome of this negotiation, the customer may decide to rank the vendor as bad, or 
not to rank him or her. Customers may meet with other buyers in order to get feedback 
about  each  vendor's  reputation.  When  two  customers  engage,  each  customer  has  to 
drag their reputation view inside the drag area to offer the information to each other. 
Once both have agreed to share the information, they will add to their knowledge base 
all the rankings gathered (experienced or traded) from the other customer. This action 
is completely optional and voluntary, and customers have to decide whether or not to 
share their information in exchange for more accurate prestige rankings.  

Simulation results. During the activity, each student can check his or her current score. The 
teacher can see an overall summary of the activity and can also enter any student icon to see 
the participant score. The teacher can modify the allowed products or required items as described 
in previous sections. Once enough time has passed or the activity is over, the teacher 
can finish the simulation and an overall summary is displayed on each device. 

8   Discussion and Future Work 

We believe that the most significant contribution of the work reported here is to provide a 
conceptual framework for applications of Participatory Simulations, which is easy to adapt 
to many subject-matter contents and to integrate to undergraduate curricula, encouraging 
the adoption of learner-centered strategies. The teachers who pre-evaluated the application 
suggest that the same technologies and ideas could be used for many subject matter areas. 
The design of effective learning environments in our conceptual framework has included 
(a) learner-centered environment (learners construct their own meanings), (b) knowledgecentered 
 environment  (learners  connect  information  into  coherent  wholes  and  embed 
information  in  a  context),  (c)  assessment-centered  environment  (learners  use  formative 
and  summative  assessment  strategies  and  feedback),  and  (d)  community-centered  environments 
(learners work on collaborative learning norms). The next phase of our investigation 
 will  develop  and  explore  more  subject-specific  applications  and  learning  and  
motivational measures at the student level. 

 

 

A Platform Supporting the Implementation of Collaborative 

533 

Acknowledgments.  This  paper  was  funded  by  Fondecyt  1050601  and  partially  by 
Fondecyt 1085010. 

References 

1.  Andrews, G., MacKinnon, K.A., Yoon, S.: Using Thinking Tags with Kindergarten Chil-
dren: A Dental Health Simulation. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 19(2), 209–219 
(2003) 

2.  Alonzi, P., Lange, D., Betty, S.: An Innovative Approach in Teaching Futures: A Participatory 
Futures Trading Simulation. Financial Practice and Education 10(1), 228–238 (2000) 

3.  Castro, B., Weingarten, K.: Towards experimental economics. Journal of Political Economy 
78, 598–607 (1970) 

4.  Chesney, A., Locke, E.: Relationships among goal difficulty, business strategies, and performance 
 on  a  complex  management  simulation  task.  Academy  of  Management  Journal 
34(2), 400–424 (1991) 

5.  Colella,  V.:  Participatory  simulations:  Building  collaborative  understanding  through  immersive 
dynamic modeling. Journal of the Learning Sciences 9, 471–500 (2000) 

6.  Colella, V., Borovoy, R., Resnick, M.: Participatory simulations: Using computational objects 
 to  learn  about  dynamic  Systems.  In:  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing 
Systems, pp. 9–10 (1998) 

7.  Dai,  G.,  Wang,  H.:  Physical  Object  Icons  Buttons  Gesture  (PIBG):  A  new  Interaction 
Paradigm  with  Pen.  In:  Shen,  W.-m.,  Lin,  Z.,  Barthès,  J.-P.A.,  Li,  T.-Q.  (eds.)  CSCWD 
2004. LNCS, vol. 3168, pp. 11–20. Springer, Heidelberg (2005) 

8.  Guyot,  P.,  Drogoul,  A.:  Designing  multi-agent  based  participatory  simulations.  In:  Proceedings 
of 5th Workshop on Agent Based Simulations, pp. 32–37 (2004) 

9.  Hinckley, K., Baudisch, P., Ramos, G., Guimbretiere, F.: Design and Analysis of Delimiters 
for Selection-Action Pen Gesture Phrases in Scriboli. In: Proceeding of CHI 2005, pp. 
451–460. ACM, New York (2005) 

10.  Klopfer, E., Yoon, S., Perry, J.:  Using Palm  Technology in Participatory Simulations of 
Complex Systems: A New Take on Ubiquitous and Accessible Mobile Computing. Journal 
of Science Education and Technology 14(3), 285–297 (2005) 

11.  Klopfer, E., Yoon, S., Rivas, L.: Comparative  analysis of Palm and wearable computers 
for Participatory Simulations. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 20, 347–359 (2004) 
12.  Kopf, S., Scheele, N., Winschel, L., Effelsberg, W.: Improving Activity and Motivation of 
Students with Innovative Teaching and Learning Technologies. In: International Conference 
 on  Methods  and  Technologies  for  Learning  (ICMTL),  pp.  551–556.  WIT  press, 
Southampton (2005) 

13.  Landay, J., Myers, B.: Sketching interfaces: Toward more human interface design. IEEE 

Computer 34(3), 56–64 (2001) 

14.  Long, A., Landay, J., Rowe, L.: PDA and gesture Use in Practice: Insights for Designers 

of Pen-based User Interfaces (Retrieved February 2007), http:// 
bmrc.berkeley.edu/research/publications/1997/142/clong.html 

15.  Soloway,  E.,  Norris,  C.,  Blumenfeld,  P.,  Fishman,  B.,  Marx,  R.:  Devices  are  Ready-atHand.
 Communications of the ACM 44(6), 15–20 (2001) 

16.  Vahey, P., Crawford, V.: Palm Education Pioneers Program: Final Evaluation Report. SRI 

International, Menlo Park (2002) 

17.  Wilensky,  U.,  Stroup,  W.M.:  Learning  through  participatory  simulations:  Network-based 
design for systems learning in Classrooms. In: Hoadley, C., Roschelle, J. (eds.) Proceedings 
of the CSCL (CSCL 1999), pp. 667–676. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah (1999) 

