 

Integrating Spatial Data and Decision Models  

in an E-Planning Tool 

Pedro Antunes1, Claudio Sapateiro1, Gustavo Zurita2, and Nelson Baloian3 

1 University of Lisbon, Faculty of Sciences,  

Campo Grande, Lisbon, Portugal 

paa@di.fc.ul.pt, claudio.sapateiro@estsetubal.ips.pt 

2 Universidad de Chile, Economy and Business School,  

Diagonal Paraguay 257, Santiago de Chile, Chile 

gzurita@ing.puc.cl 

3 Universidad de Chile, Engineering School,  
Blanco Encalada 2120, Santiago de Chile, Chile 

nbaloian@gmail.com 

Abstract. We review several decision models to derive six fundamental requirements 
to collaborative spatial decision-making: perceiving changes in spatial data; 
retaining interpretation mindsets; externalizing actions and expectancies in spatial 
data; organizing divergent and convergent working modes; supporting the recognition 
of situation-action elements; and managing task/pattern structures. A review of 
the current state of the art shows limited support to some of these requirements, in 
particular task/pattern and divergent/convergent support. An e-planning prototype 
was  developed  to  demonstrate  the  impact  of  these  requirements  in  collaborative 
spatial decision-making. Results from a preliminary experiment indicate the prototype 
enables people to contribute, explain, exteriorize and share their ideas in relation 
with spatial references.  

Keywords: Geocollaboration, Decision Models, e-Planning. 

1   Introduction 

This  research  was  motivated  by  the  design  of  a  collaborative  tool  supporting  eplanning.
  E-planning is the label adopted by a broad research agenda addressing the 
interaction between information technology and planning, including various key concerns 
 such  as  territorial  management,  policy  making,  governance,  citizenship  and 
participation [1].  

The  main  vision  driving  the  tool  design  was  supplying  various  stakeholders  –
architects, urban designers, city planners and public administrators – with a collaborative 
tool capable to advance new perceptions and ideas regarding city planning. City 
planning is a complex process challenging design with a variety of technical and human 
requirements. In our view, the best approach to a wicked situation like this one is 
starting highly focused on a very specific challenge and only moving forward when 
that challenge is sufficiently understood and conveniently resolved.  

G. Kolfschoten, T. Herrmann, and S. Lukosch (Eds.): CRIWG 2010, LNCS 6257, pp. 97–112, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 

98 

P. Antunes et al. 

In our case study, the main challenge is integrating spatial data with the decision 
model. City planning involves various types of geographically related data. This data 
is traditionally managed with Geographical Information Systems (GIS).  

The integration of spatial data with decision models is not new. Actually, it has lead 
to  an  emerging  category  of  GIS  designated  Collaborative  Spatial  Decision  Making 
(CSDM) [2, 3]. CSDM may also be regarded as a combination of GIS with Decision 
Support  Systems  (DSS)  and  Group  Support  Systems  (GSS)  [4,  5],  although  falling 
outside the typical DSS/GSS categorization [6]. According to the state of the art, CSDM 
concerns  the  provision  of  the  following  functionality  [7]:  collecting  spatially-related 
data, identifying locations according to a set of criteria, exploring relationships, displaying 
and analyzing data, and exporting data to other systems and tools.  

While this functionality is essential to integrate spatial data with decision-making 
activities, it does not address some specific problems: (1) it does not explicitly consider 
 models  of  the  decision-making  process,  which  means  its  potential  users  will 
have to informally manage the process; (2) in complex contexts, decisions are highly 
dependent on collaboration, which requires adding support to coordination, awareness 
and collaborative visualization into the CSDM functionality; and finally, (3) decision 
making  also  brings  new  types  of  spatially-related  data,  such  as  talks,  discussions, 
negotiations, and brainstorms, which should be seamlessly integrated with the remaining 
data.  

We may express  with  more accuracy that our  main challenge is  modeling spatial 
data  within  the  context  of  a  broader  model  of  the  decision-making  process,  understood 
as a collaborative endeavor. The paper is organized as follows. We start with a 
review of several decision-making models to highlight the main model constructs that 
inform CSDM design. We then review several CSDM tools to highlight present omissions 
and opportunities. In Section four we describe the e-planning tool developed to 
explore the integration between spatial data and decision models. In section five we 
discuss the tool’s evaluation. We conclude the paper with a synthesis and discussion 
of the obtained results.  

2   Overview of Decision-Making Models 

2.1   Conceptual Views 

In Figure 1 we present three conceptual views of the decision-making process. They 
may  be  regarded  as  meta-models,  since  they  serve  to  build  other  models.  The  first 
view regards the decision process as a production system  having three components: 
inputs,  process  and  outputs  [8].  The  process  component  concerns  social  interaction 
with support from technology in three main forms: decision aids; managing the decision 
process; and adoption of emerging structures to enhance decisions. This conceptual 
view is highly prevalent in the research field [9].  

The second view regards decision making as a composition of data management, 
model management and dialogue management [10]. Of most importance in this view 
is model management, which is responsible for controlling the strategic, tactical and 
operational decisions of the decision makers through technology support.  

 

 

Integrating Spatial Data and Decision Models in an E-Planning Tool 

99 

The  third  model  was  originally  proposed  by  Seligmann  et  al.  [11]  and  later  on 
adopted  by  Vreede  et  al.  [12]  to  conceptualize  the  different  aspects  that  set  up  the 
technological support to the decision-making process. The way of thinking concerns 
thinking  about  the  application  domain,  while  the  way  of  controlling  concerns  the 
design approach that follows problem conceptualization. Design is then dependent on 
two  other  constructs:  the  way  of  working,  i.e.  how  people carry  out  their  activities; 
and  the  way  of  modeling,  i.e.  the  representations  necessary  to  support  the  way  of 
working. These  models  highlight  that decision  models coexist  in a complex context 
characterized by process inputs and outcomes, competing data and dialogue models, 
and a difficult balance between design constraints and ways of working.  

Fig. 1. Conceptual views 

 

2.2   Models of the Cognitive Process 

The models of the cognitive process regard decision-making as a cognitive function. One 
of  the  most  famous  models  was  proposed by  Card  et  al.  [13].  It  regards  the  cognitive 
function as a machine  where stimuli ignite perceptual activities, followed by cognitive 
and motor activities, which in turn originate new stimuli. In this model, decision-making 
is a cyclic endeavor continuously supported with feedback information.  

This model has been highly influential, the reason why many other models tend to 
reflect the same information processing view, with most differences centered on the 
cognitive task. For instance, the Contextual Control Model [14] adopts a similar cyclic 
view, although  with the  addition of disturbances,  which are fundamental to understand 
human behavior facing the unexpected. The Reference Model of Cognition 
[15,  16]  extends  the  cognitive  component  with  interpretation  and  planning  components.
 The Step Ladder Model [17] also extends the cognitive component with identification,
 interpretation, task definition and planning components.  

 

 

100 

P. Antunes et al. 

Fig. 2. Models of the cognitive process 

 

Two  cognitive  approaches  that  depart  away  from  the  perceptual-cognitive-motor 
mechanics  are  the  Sensemaking  theory  and  the  Model  of  Knowledge  Creation.  The 
Sensemaking  theory  [18]  seeks  to  understand  how  humans  deal  with  information 
through  their  equivocal  perceptions  and  cognitive  biases.  Ecological  changes  enact 
perception according to commitment and interpretation mindsets. Some cues are selected,
  made  intelligible  and  retained.  Retention  is  important  to  understand  how  organizations 
 learn.  Perhaps  the  main  conceptual  change  proposed  by  sensemaking, 
when  compared  to  the  previous  models,  is  that  it  moves  away  from  reproducing  an 
information-processing machine towards a more ambiguous cycle, highly dependent 
on retention.  

The  Model  of  Knowledge  Creation  [19]  seeks  to  understand  how  humans  utilize 
tacit  and  explicit  knowledge.  Knowledge  is  transformed  from  tacit  (in  the  mind)  to 
explicit (in the world) through a cycle of data socialization, externalization, combination 
and internalization. This model highlights the main differences between individual 
 (internalization  and  externalization)  and  group  (socialization  and  combination) 
functions.  

In  Figure  2  we  present  a  visual  representation  of  the  reviewed  models.  We  note 
that this representation is necessarily incomplete. It primarily serves to highlight that 
the  decision-making  process  seems  to  be  grounded  on  four  main  theoretical  con-
structs:  events,  perception,  cognition  and  actions.  The  main  differences  posited  by 
these models seem to be centered on the cognition construct. In the next section we 
will further analyze this particular construct.  

 

 

 

Integrating Spatial Data and Decision Models in an E-Planning Tool 

101 

2.3   Models of the Decision Process 

Likewise the cognitive process, many models have been proposed to explain the decision 
 process.  One  highly  influential  perspective  is  the  Subjective  Expected  Theory 
[20,  21].  This  theory  considers  that  rational  decision  makers,  when  facing  a  set  of 
alternatives and outcomes, define utility functions to determine which choices should 
be elected. This theory is the basis for what has been designated normative approach 
to decision making under uncertainty [20].  

Other theories have followed the normative approach, e.g., Analytic Hierarchy Process 
(AHP) [22]. AHP commends four major steps in making decisions: break down the 
problem  into  a  hierarchy  of  decision  elements;  collect  data  regarding  these  elements 
using  pair-wise  comparisons;  estimate  the  relative  weights  of  decision  elements;  and 
aggregate the relative weights to obtain a set of ratings for the decision alternatives.  

Simon [23, 24] criticizes the normative approach for its perfect utility-maximizing rationality,
 emphasizing that in real-world organizations decision makers do not find the 
perfect conditions necessary to frame problems. Simon proposed the Problem Solving 
Model  with  three  main  elements:  representing  the  problem,  finding  alternatives  and 
selecting  alternatives  (often  designated  intelligence,  design  and  choice).  Two  other 
distinctive concepts in this model are heuristics and the notion of satisficing. Heuristics 
explain why decision makers often simplify the problem space by applying means-ends 
analysis, compromises, time constraints and even rules of thumb. The notion of satisficing 
explains that often the decision makers do no aspire to maximize utility but instead 
seek to find out a solution that satisfies reasonable conditions.  

The  Recognition  Primed  Decision  Making  theory  (RPDM)  [25]  introduced  the 
naturalistic  perspective  over  decision  making  [26].  This  perspective  distinguishes 
itself from the previous approaches by trying to understand how time pressure, uncertainty,
 ill-defined goals and other factors affect the decision makers. Instead of trying 
to define how to make decisions, the naturalistic perspective seeks to understand how 
decisions  are  actually  made.  RPDM  thus  stresses  three  fundamental  components  of 
decision-making:  experience  the  situation,  recognize  and  classify,  and  react.  This 
theory also brings forward the concept of situation awareness as a mechanism to apprehend 
expectancies, cues, goals and actions.  

Besides  the  rational-versus-organizational-versus-naturalistic  debate  briefly  described 
above, many other theories seek to explain more specific conditions underlying 
 the  decision-making  process.  For  instance,  the  Cooperative  Decision  Making 
model  [27]  emphasizes  the  importance  of  negotiating  conflicts.  The  Participatory 
Decision Making model [28] distinguishes between divergent and convergent collaboration 
 modes.  The  Soft  Systems  Methodology  (SSM)  [29]  proposes  a  conceptual 
approach to problem solving based on action research, coping iteratively with problem 
complexity while at the same time avoiding reductionism. SSM highlights action 
as  a  fundamental  driver  for  problem  solving,  instead  of  analysis  and  structure.  And 
finally, Collaboration Engineering [30] synthesizes decision-making as a collection of 
behavioral patterns that may be “engineered” to respond to contextual situations.  

In  Figure  3  we  may  observe  the  impact  of  the  Problem  Solving  Model  and  it’s 
threefold  construct  (intelligence,  design  and  choice)  on  understanding  the  decisionmaking 
process. We also find a relative consensus that this logical construct is considered 
cyclical and not necessarily prescriptive.  

 

102 

P. Antunes et al. 

Fig. 3. Models of the decision process 

 

2.4   Discussion and Synthesis 

What can  we distill  from the above  models? First, decision-making involves a constant 
flow of events, perception, cognition and action. Second, the cognitive activity 
seems to be organized according to three main patterns: (1) problem identification and 
information gathering; (2) information processing and debate of alternatives; and (3) 
negotiation,  convergence  and  choice.  And  third,  decision-making  also  involves  data 
management,  dialogue  management  and  model  management.  Model  management  is 
fundamentally  concerned  with  structuring  the  main  patterns  previously  identified. 
Furthermore, model management is intimately related with the way of thinking, controlling 
and working. From this integrated perspective we may now derive some fundamental 
requirements to CSDM:  

Perception support. Stimuli, disturbances, events and ecological changes are necessary 
to stimulate perception. CSDM should therefore associate changes in spatial data 
with adequate perceptual mechanisms, e.g., dynamic visualization, strategic and tactical 
views of spatial data and associated events.  

Retention  support.  Retention  is  a  fundamental  driver  of  sensemaking.  It  serves  to 
construct  personal  and  organizational  memory  and  contributes  to  enact  responses 
whenever recognizable situations emerge. CSDM should maintain a repository of the 
interpretation mindsets and enacted responses in context with spatial data.  

 

 

Integrating Spatial Data and Decision Models in an E-Planning Tool 

103 

Externalization  support.  Externalization  is  essential  to  knowledge  creation,  since 
knowledge  is  constructed  by  articulating  tacit  knowledge  into  shared  expectancies, 
cues, goals and actions. CSDM should therefore provide support for integrating tacit 
knowledge with spatial data.  

Divergent/convergent support. Decision-making seems to be organized according to 
intertwined  cycles  of  divergent  and  convergent  activities,  where  divergent  activities 
favor  problem  identification  and  information  gathering,  and  convergent  activities 
promote  the  negotiation  and  selection  of  alternatives.  CSDM  should  support  these 
working modes.  

Recognition  support. Recognition and classification play a fundamental role in the 
naturalistic  approach  to  decision-making.  Recognition  prepares  the  ground  for  empirical 
 decisions  based  on  situation  awareness  and  pattern  matching.  CSDM  should 
therefore  provide  situation-action  support  by  linking  spatial  data  with  expectancies, 
cues, goals and actions defined by the decision makers.  

Task/pattern  management.  The  decision-making  process  seems  to  be  organized 
according  with  patterned  activities  like  divergence,  convergence,  data  organization, 
option  evaluation,  etc.  Several  theories  posit  these  patterned  activities  are  itera-
tive/cyclic  and  may  not  follow  a  prescriptive  or  recommended  structure.  Thus,  although 
 CSDM  should  carefully  avoid  prescribing  rigid  structures,  they  should  also 
support the way of controlling by implementing task/pattern management.  

3   Literature Analysis 

We adopted the following approach to analyze CSDM literature. First, we started by 
collecting papers published in journals, conferences and workshops on the subject of 
enabling working on spatial data while simultaneously making collaborative decisions 
[31]. This task allowed us to identify a set of 61 papers. We then applied a set of criteria 
to reduce our review to: (1) papers published from 2000 to 2009; (2) papers focused 
on the analysis, design, development and evaluation of CSDM applications; and 
(3)  excluding  papers  centered  on  literature  review,  framework  and  theory  development,
 infrastructure support to CSDM and specific application scenarios. A total of 18 
papers were found to fulfill these criteria. We then elected 10 papers as most representative 
of current CSDM. Table 1 summarizes the elected papers.  

From this overview we may draw some observations and comments. Our first observation 
 is  that  none  of  the  reviewed  CSDM  tools  addresses  task/pattern  management.
 Actually, only [2] refers to the importance of managing decision-making tasks, 
although such functionality is not implemented in the prototype.  

Another issue is related with divergent/convergent support. Most reviewed CSDM 
tools support either convergent or divergent activities, with only three cases supporting 
both modes [36-38]. But more interestingly, the tools supporting both modes do 
so in a transparent way, i.e. the users may converge and diverge according to factors 
such  as  network  connectivity  or  interaction  with  private  and  public  spaces.  These 
tools do not explicitly define if work is divergent or convergent according to the specific 
task at hand.  

 

104 

P. Antunes et al. 

Table 1. Most representative papers of current CSDM 

Annotations and visual landmarks  Annotations and visual landmarks 

 

 

 

 
Perception 

Retention 
Externalization 

Convertino et al. 2005 [32] 
Workspace metaphor, multiple 
views, filters, activity awareness 
indicators, change icons 
Historical records 
Has chat, editor and interactive 
map 

 

Divergent/convergent  Convergent (tactical planning) 
Recognition 
Task/pattern manag.  Only supports roles 
MacEachren et al. 2006 [34] 
 
Perception 
Desktop metaphor 
Retention 
 
Externalization 
Speech and gesture recognition 
Divergent/convergent  Convergent (large whiteboard) 
Recognition 
Task/pattern manag. 
 
Perception 

Incident markers 
 
Convertino et al. 2008 [36] 
Sidebar, telepointer, role  
indicators 
Retention 
 
Externalization 
Notes, scribbles, symbols 
Divergent/convergent  Both (shared and private  

workspaces) 
 

Recognition 
Task/pattern manag.  Only supports roles 
 
Perception 

 

Brewer et al. 2000 [38]  
Depict change over time,  
gestures, member behavior, flash 
regions 
Activity logging 
 

Rinner 2006 [33] 
Hypermap metaphor 

Retains geo-argumentative relations 
Argumentation model 

Divergent (early phase) 

 
Bortenschlager et al. 2007 [35] 
Regular updates 
 
Overlays 
Convergent (using mobile devices) 
 
 
Capata et al. 2008 [37] 
Object push 

 
Geographical features 
Both (using mobile devices) 

 
 
MacEachren et al. 2004 [2] 
Split views, member behavior, avatars, 
pointing gestures 

 
Drawing and selection tools 
Convergent 
 
Defines exploration, analysis, synthesis 
and presentation tasks, but does not 
implement 
Torino et al. 2001 [40] 
 
 
Stands and seeds (markers) 
Divergent (using shared database) 
Conflict detection (with markers) 
 

Retention 
Externalization 
Divergent/convergent  Both 
Recognition 
Task/pattern manag. 

 
 

Marking 
 

Cai 2005 [39] 
Change propagation 
 
GIS workspace, group summary 

 
Perception 
Retention 
Externalization 
Divergent/convergent  Convergent (large displays) 
Recognition 
Task/pattern manag. 
 
Most tools do not support retention,  with  few exceptions supporting activity logging 
and historical records [32, 33, 38]. Perception has received significant attention, 
with multiple mechanisms being available. The recognition support is apparently less 
rich.  Several  tools  support  annotations  and  markers  [32,  33,  39,  40]  but  miss  more 
strategic  features linking  spatial data  with expectancies, cues, goals and actions. Finally,
  externalization  combines  GIS  features  with  common  groupware  functionality 

 

Integrating Spatial Data and Decision Models in an E-Planning Tool 

105 

like chat, text editing and argumentation. This review clearly indicates our research 
and development efforts should be centered on the support to: (1) task/pattern management;
 (2) explicit convergent/divergent collaboration modes; (3) retention; and (4) 
recognition.  

4   E-Planning Tool 

Like  most  CSDM  tools  reviewed  in  the  previous  section,  the  e-planning  tool  has  a 
workspace allowing visualizing and interacting  with a  map. This  map  may be complemented 
with spatially related visual objects like sketches, drawings and free-hand 
text, collaboratively produced by the users to enhance their perception.  

Unlike the other tools, we also support task/pattern management. This is implemented 
 with  multiple  workspaces,  targeted  to  specific  tasks/patterns  (see  Figure  4). 
The set of tasks/patterns was derived from the Problem Solving Model: (1) gathering, 
(2) debate, and (3) choice. We stipulate that all users operate in the same workspace, 
but  they  may  collectively  change  the  current  workspace  whenever  necessary.  This 
avoids a prescriptive approach to making decisions. Mini-maps allow visualizing the 
three workspaces and also serve to select the current workspace.  

Externalization is supported with sketching, drawing and text writing in the workspace.
  Retention  is  based  on  logging  changes  to  the  visual  objects  present  in  the 
workspace, allowing the users to move back and forth the timeline. To support recognition,
  the  tool  allows  selecting  annotations  (sketches,  drawings,  text)  from  one 
workspace and dragging them to another workspace (using the mini-maps).  

We define the gathering workspace is divergent and the debate and choice workspaces 
are convergent. This allows users’ free whiling and divergent thinking while 
gathering  information,  but  requests  the  users’  focus  while  debating  and  choosing 
options.  

The tool runs on tablet computers and may be used in several physical configurations,
 including a set of interconnected tablets, one large whiteboard or a combination 
of both. Our prototype uses SMARTech’s SmartBoard. The prototype adopts a fully 
replicated architecture and is heavily based on pen-based gestures to interact with the 
user interface [41]. When a replica is started in a tablet, it automatically establishes an 
ad-hoc network with the other tablets and synchronizes all spatial data.  

The tool’s user interface is shown in Figure 4. The current workspace is shown on 
the left handside. The participants may use the pen to sketch and write over the map. 
The mini-maps are shown to the right. They support two functions. One is moving the 
group’s focus of attention to a different workspace (the dark background color indicates 
what workspace is currently selected). As previously mentioned, three different 
workspaces are supported. The one on the top is the gathering workspace, the one in 
the middle is the debate workspace, and the lower one is the choice workspace.  

Another  important  functionality  is  indexing  the  data  elements  created  over  the 
map. Each index entry has a set of sketches consecutively made by one user. In Figure 
4, the gathering and debate workspaces show two index entries each. These indexes 
simplify  the  selection  and  edition  of  individual  data  elements  using  gestures.  The 
mini-maps support vertical scrolling but do not use a scrollbar to preserve space.  

 

 

106 

P. Antunes et al. 

Fig. 4. The e-planning tool 

 

The data elements  may be copied from one  workspace to  another. The copy and 
paste operations are performed at a granularity that considers index entries, not individual 
sketches. The origins  and destinations of the copy/paste operations are either 
the current workspace or the mini-map. The pasted data elements maintain their spatial 
 references.  It  is  possible  to  scroll  and  zoom  over  the  map  and  related  data  elements.
 The icons located on the center-top of the screen provide awareness on who is 
currently using the tool.  

We now describe in more detail the functionality associated with each workspace. 
The gathering workspace operates in a divergent mode. This means the workspace is 
private and the data elements sketched over the  map are not shared  with the group. 
This collaboration mode allows users to prepare their ideas before sharing them with 
the  others.  When  necessary,  a  user  may  share  a  particular  data  element  with  other 
users.  Selecting  the  corresponding  index  entry  and  dragging  it  to  the  users’  icons 
shown at the center-top of the screen accomplish this.  

The debate workspace serves to explore and refine ideas. This is a convergent task 
involving all users. Initially this workspace only shows the map, but allows users copying 
index entries from their individual gathering workspaces using pen-based gestures. 
In this way the users may share, organize and refine the set of common ideas.  

The choice workspace operates in a very similar way. It is initially empty and may 
be populated by copying index entries from the debate workspace. This workspace is 
intended to develop a final visual representation of the decisions made by the group.  

5   Case Scenario and Evaluation 

The main challenge addressed by this research was supporting decision making within 
the spatial context. We regarded this challenge from a design science perspective, i.e., 

 

 

Integrating Spatial Data and Decision Models in an E-Planning Tool 

107 

seeking to extend human and organizational capabilities through innovative artifacts 
[42]. It thus makes sense to also evaluate the proposed solution using a design science 
approach.  According  to  Hevner  et  al.  [42],  design  solutions  must  be  justi-
fied/evaluated with the twofold purpose to improve artifacts and develop theory. One 
possible  evaluation  approach  consists  in  evaluating  the  utility  of  the  design  artifact 
using controlled experiments. In this section  we report a preliminary field trial  with 
the e-planning tool.  

We  asked  a  team  of  three  people  to  perform  an  e-planning  task  considering  the 
plans  of  the  municipality  of  Santiago  to  merge  the  area  occupied  by  the  Faculty  of 
Engineering of the Universidad de Chile with the nearby-located park, now separated 
by an avenue. The task was divided in two sessions during which the team had to use 
the  e-planning  tool  to  generate  ideas  on  how  to  create  a  continuous  area  from  the 
faculty to the park.  

During the first session, two team members worked in the field using their Tablet 
PCs, documenting their ideas in the gathering workspace. In the second session, they 
joined the third member in the office. The third member used a SmartBoard while the 
other two members kept using their Tablet PCs (Figure 5).  

After synchronizing the applications, the members started exposing their solutions 
and  discussing  using  the  debate  workspace.  New  alternatives  were  generated  and 
indexed in this  workspace. Finally, in the choice  workspace all  members collaboratively 
 developed  the  final  solution,  which  in  fact  was  a  merge  of  the  two  proposed 
solutions.  

Fig. 5. Using the e-planning tool in the second working session 

 

In the end of the experiment we asked the participants to analyze the prototype usage 
in the predefined scenario and come up with comments and observations regarding its 
utility. The discussion confirmed the divergent collaboration mode is beneficial to the 
initial decision stages, where the decision makers seek to generate ideas. Externalization 

 

108 

P. Antunes et al. 

was  considered  adequately  implemented  by  the  prototype.  It  was  explicitly  noted  the 
sketches helped exteriorizing and sharing tacit knowledge.  

The pen-based gestures were considered easy to use, although more traditional interaction 
 modalities  based  on  mouse  and  keyboard  were  also  requested.  The  choice 
workspace  was perceived as the  most  helpful one because  it is  focused on bringing 
the group towards the task goals and, at the same time, allows importing information 
from the other tasks in a flexible way. The debate workspace was also perceived as 
very helpful to organize ideas through sketches and concept maps.  

Overall, the prototype  was perceived as relevant to e-planners because  it enables 
people to contribute, explain, exteriorize and share their ideas in relation with spatial 
references.  Nevertheless,  the  participants  suggested  improving  the  recognition  
abilities,  considering  a  major  challenge  the  implementation  of  adequate  awareness 
mechanisms.  Finally,  the  participants  considered  the  learning  curve  was  adequate, 
commenting they were adapted to the prototype during the second session.  

6   Synthesis and Discussion 

The main contributions of this work include an integrated perspective of the relationships 
 between  spatially  related  data  and  decision-making.  To  build  this  integrated 
perspective, we analyzed an extensive pool of models explaining the cognitive behaviors 
associated with decision-making. We then distilled six requirements: perception, 
retention, externalization, recognition, divergent/convergent collaboration modes, and 
task/pattern management. Perception emphasizes a cognitive view over the decisionmaking 
process. It brings forward the need to convey spatially-related data in a way 
that stimulates decision makers to perceive and enact cognitive functions like identification,
 interpretation, selection, task definition, planning, externalization, action, etc.  
Retention  addresses  the  withholding  of  personal  and  organizational  experiences, 
resulting from the confrontation between events and actions, interpretations, choices 
and other constructs. Retention is a fundamental driver for sensemaking, and sensemaking 
 is  a  fundamental  driver  for  making  decisions.  In  the  CSDM  context,  we  
understand the retention requirement as the need to preserve decisions, decision constructs 
and spatial data in a coherent framework that promotes learning and recall.  

Externalization  brings  forward  the  view  that  decision-making  is  a  collective  endeavor 
 and  knowledge  must  be  transformed  from  tacit  to  explicit.  This  signals  that 
decision makers should be able to collaboratively manage spatially related data. Recognition 
 is  closely  associated  with  a  naturalistic  view  over  decision-making  where 
emergence, time pressure and uncertainty give the fundamental context to understand 
choices. In the CSDM context, this requirement renders the collaborative creation of 
annotations, visual marks and other spatially-related visual elements that contribute to 
react to evolving situations.  

The divergent/convergent view brings forward the understanding that teams must 
devise  strategies  to  optimize  collective  tasks.  Often  the  best  strategy  is  focusing  on 
the same task, while in other cases is having the participants working independently. 
We regard flexible management of collaboration modes a fundamental requirement of 
CSDM.  

 

 

Integrating Spatial Data and Decision Models in an E-Planning Tool 

109 

The  consideration  for  task/pattern  management  highlights  the  view  that  decision 
makers  should  be  able  to  control  the  tasks  necessary  to  reach  their  goals.  In  the 
CSDM context, this  means that task/pattern  management  should be explicitly available,
 although avoiding prescribed procedures.  

Our review of the state of the art shows that existing CSDM tools offer adequate 
levels  of  perception,  retention  and  externalization  support.  However,  diver-
gent/convergent and task/pattern support seems to be underdeveloped. Of course we 
had to verify if these requirements would have some concrete impact on CSDM design.
  We  developed  an  e-planning  tool  with  that  goal  in  mind.  We  codified  the  requirements 
 into  concrete  functionality.  In  particular,  we  structured  the  tool  in  three 
working  spaces  specifically  dedicated  to  support  problem  representation,  finding 
alternatives  and  selecting  alternatives.  Each  working  space  maintains  the  decisionmaking 
elements according to their spatial context. This functionality implements the 
task/pattern management requirement.  

Of the three workspaces, one supports divergent activities while the other two support 
 convergent  activities.  This  decision  was  drawn  from  theory  recommending  the 
adoption  of  divergent  activities  during  the  preliminary  decision  phases  and  convergent 
 activities  during  the  later  decision  phases  [28].  Divergence  was  implemented 
with private workspaces, while convergence relies on shared workspaces supporting 
concurrent data management. This functionality implements the divergent/convergent 
requirement.  

The  perception,  recognition  and  externalization  requirements  were  resolved  with  a 
set  of  visual  elements  the  users  may  create  and  manipulate  using  pen-based  gestures. 
These  elements  are  spatially  related  since  a  map  always  exists  in  the  workspaces.  A 
team evaluated the tool in a laboratory experiment and considered it useful and usable. 

Nevertheless, we should discuss some limitations we find in this study. One limitation 
is that we do not attempt to define a unifying decision-making theory. It may perhaps 
be attempted in a future work, and significant groundwork has already been done, 
for instance bringing together the cognitive and decision-making models. But this endeavor 
requires additional work to demonstrate the validity of its constructs. What we 
have done instead was focusing on design-oriented goals, deriving a set of requirements 
from the various theories. This approach is much more simple to validate: we just have 
to build a tool and justify its utility, as recommended by Hevner et al. [42].  

Nevertheless the justification of the tool will require future work. More scenarios, 
experiments,  participants  and  inquiries  are  necessary  to  validate  it.  We  should  also 
consider in the future moving out from the laboratory to the field, which will require 
developing further the prototype to improve its overall stability.  

We  also  recognize  that  the  perception,  recognition  and  externalization  requirements 
were underdeveloped when compared with the other requirements. Indeed our 
main  focus  was on the requirements  we perceived as  most neglected by the  CSDM 
literature. But in retrospect we perceive that many contributions to better implement 
these requirements could be done in the future. Particularly, we may further explore 
the  perception  and  recognition  requirements  in  the  context  of  team  situation  awareness 
[43]. This perspective may bring forward new technological mechanisms capable 
to improve the perception of the dynamics often associated to spatially-related data.  

 

 

110 

P. Antunes et al. 

Acknowledgements.  This  paper  was  supported  by  the  Portuguese  Foundation  for 
Science and Technology (PTDC/EIA/102875/2008) and Fondecyt.  

References 

1.  Curwell, S., Deakin, M., Cooper, I., Paskaleva-Shapira, K., Ravetz, J., Babicki, D.: Citi-
zens’  Expectations  of  Information  Cities:  Implications  for  Urban  Planning  and  Design. 
Building Research and Information 33, 55–66 (2005) 

2.  MacEachren,  A.,  Brewer,  I.:  Developing  a  Conceptual  Framework  for  Visually-Enabled 
Geocollaboration.  International  Journal  of  Geographical  Information  Science 18,  1–34 
(2004) 

3.  MacEachren, A.: Moving Geovisualization toward Support for Group Work. In: Dykes, J., 

et al. (eds.) Exploring Geovisualization, pp. 445–462. Elsevier, Amsterdam (2005) 

4.  Nyerges, T., Montejano, R., Oshiro, C., Dadswell, M.: Group-Based Geographic Information 
 Systems  for  Transportation  Site  Selection.  Transportation  Research  C 5,  349–369 
(1997) 

5.  Armstrong, M.: Requirements for the Development of Gis-Based Group Decision Support 

Systems. Journal of the American Society for Information Science 45, 669–677 (1994) 

6.  Arnott, D., Pervan, G.: A Critical Analysis of Decision Support Systems Research. Journal 

of Information Technology 20, 67–87 (2005) 

7.  Crossland, M., Wynne, B., Perkins, W.: Spatial Decision Support Systems: An Overview 

of Technology and a Test of Efficacy. Decision Support Systems 14, 219–235 (1995) 

8.  Jankowski, P., Nyerges, T., Smith, A., Moore, T., Horvath, E.: Spatial Group Choice: A 
Sdss Tool for Collaborative Spatial Decision-Making. International Journal of Geographical 
Information Science 11, 577–602 (1997) 

9.  Fjermestad,  J.,  Hiltz,  S.:  An  Assessment  of  Group  Support  Systems  Experimental  Re-
search: Methodology and Results. Journal of Management Information Systems 15, 7–149 
(1999) 

10.  Pearson, J., Shim, J.: An Empirical Investigation into DSS Structures and Environments. 

Decision Support Systems 13, 141–158 (1995) 

11.  Seligmann, P., Wijers, G., Sol, H.: Analysing the Structure of IS Methodologies. In: Proceedings 
of the 1st Dutch Conference on Information Systems,  Amersfoort, The Netherlands 
(1989) 

12.  Vreede,  G.,  Briggs,  R.:  Collaboration  Engineering:  Designing  Repeatable  Processes  for 
High-Value Collaborative Tasks. In: Proceedings of the 38th Hawaii International Conference 
on System Sciences, Hawaii (2005) 

13.  Card,  S.,  Moran,  T.,  Newell,  A.:  The  Psychology  of  Human-Computer  Interaction. 

Lawrance Elrbaum, Hillsdale (1983) 

14.  Hollnagel,  E.,  Woods,  D.:  Joint  Cognitive  Systems:  Foundations  of  Cognitive  Systems 

Engineering. CRC Press, Boca Raton (2005) 

15.  Wickens, C.: Engineering Psychology and Human Performance. Charles Merrill, Columbus 
(1984) 

16.  Cacciabue, P.: Guide to Applying Human Factors Methods. Springer, London (2004) 
17.  Rasmussen, J.: Information Processes and Human-Computer Interaction. An Approach to 

Cognitive Engineering. North Holland, Oxford (1986) 

18.  Weick, K.: Making Sense of the Organization. Blackwell, Oxford (2001) 
19.  Nonaka, I.: The Knowledge-Creating Company. Harvard Business Review, 96–104 (1991) 

 

 

Integrating Spatial Data and Decision Models in an E-Planning Tool 

111 

20.  Fishburn, P.: Subjective Expected Utility: A Review of Normative Theories. Theory and 

Decision 13, 139–199 (1981) 

21.  Ramsey, F.: Truth and Probability. In: Ramsey, F. (ed.) The Foundations of Mathematics 

and Other Logial Essays, Harcourt, Brace & Co., New York (1931) 

22.  Saaty, T.: The Analytical Hierarchy Process. McGraw-Hill, Inc., New York (1980) 
23.  Simon, H.: Administrative Behavior: A Study of Decision-Making Processes in Administrative 
Organizations, 4th edn. Free Press, New York (1997) 

24.  Simon, H.: Decision Making and Problem Solving. Interfaces 17, 11–31 (1987) 
25.  Klein,  G.:  A  Recognition-Primed  Decision  (Rpd)  Model  of  Rapid  Decision  Making.  In: 
Klein, G., et al. (eds.) Decision Making in Action: Models and Methods. Ablex, Norwood 
(1993) 

26.  Lipshitz, R., Klein, G., Orasanu, J.: Taking Stock of Naturalistic Decision Making. Journal 

of Behavioral Decision Making 14, 331–352 (2001) 

27.  Wong, S.: Preference-Based Decision Making for Cooperative Knowledge-Based Systems. 

ACM transactions on information systems 12, 407–435 (1994) 

28.  Kaner, S.: Facilitator’s Guide to Participatory Decision-Making. New Society Publishers, 

Philadelphia (1996) 

29.  Checkland,  P.:  Soft  Systems  Methodology:  A  Thirty  Year  Retrospective.  Systems  Research 
and Behavioral Science 17, S11-S58 (1981) 

30.  Briggs, R., Vreede, G., Nunamaker, J.: Collaboration Engineering with Thinklets to Pursue 
Sustained Success with Group Support Systems. Journal of Management Information Systems 
19, 31–64 (2003) 

31.  MacEachren, A., Cai, G., Sharma, R., Rauschert, I., Brewer, I., Bolelli, L., Shaparenko, B., 
Fuhrmann,  S.,  Wang,  H.:  Enabling  Collaborative  Geoinformation  Access  and  DecisionMaking 
through a Natural, Multimodal Interface. International Journal of Geographical Information 
Science 19, 293–317 (2005) 

32.  Convertino, G., Ganoe, C., Schafer, W., Yost, B., Carroll, J.: A Multiple View Approach 
to Support Common Ground in Distributed and Synchronous Geo-Collaboration. In: Proceedings 
 of  Third  International  Conference  on  Coordinated  and  Multiple  Views  in  Exploratory 
Visualization, London, UK, pp. 121–132. IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos 
(2005) 

33.  Rinner,  C.:  Argumentation  Mapping  in  Collaborative  Spatial  Decision  Making.  In:  Balram,
 S., Dragićević, S. (eds.) Collaborative Geographic Information Systems. Idea Group 
Publishing, Hershey (2006) 

34.  MacEachren, A., Guiray, C., Brewer, I., Chen, J.: Supporting Map-Based Geocollaboration 
through Natural Interfaces to Large-Screen Displays. Cartographic Perspectives 54, 4–22 
(2006) 

35.  Bortenschlager, M., Leitinger, S., Rieser, H., Steinmann, R.: Towards a P2P-Based Geocollaboration 
 System  for  Disaster  Management.  In:  GI-Days  2007  -  Young  Researchers 
Forum (2007) 

36.  Convertino, G., Mentis, H., Bhambare, P., Ferro, C., Carroll, J., Rosson, M.: Comparing 
Media in Emergency Planning. In: Proceedings of the 5th International ISCRAM Conference,
 Washington, DC (2008) 

37.  Capata, A., Marella, A., Russo, R.: A Geo-Based Application for the Managemnt of Mobile 
 Actors  During  Crisis  Situations.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  5th  International  ISCRAM 
Conference, Washington, DC (2008) 

38.  Brewer, I., MacEachren, A., Abdo, H., Gundrum, J., Otto, G.: Collaborative Geographic 
Visualization:  Enabling  Shared  Understanding  of  Environmental  Processes.  In:  Proceedings 
of IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization, Washington, DC, p. 137 (2000) 

 

112 

P. Antunes et al. 

39.  Cai,  G.,  MacEachren,  A.,  Brewer,  I.,  McNeese,  M.,  Sharma,  R.,  Fuhrmann,  S.:  MapMediated 
Geocollaborative Crisis Management. In: Kantor, P., Muresan, G., Roberts, F., 
Zeng, D.D., Wang, F.-Y., Chen, H., Merkle, R.C. (eds.) ISI 2005. LNCS, vol. 3495, pp. 
429–435. Springer, Heidelberg (2005) 

40.  Touriño,  J.,  Rivera,  F.,  Alvarez,  C.,  Dans,  C., Parapar,  J.,  Doallo,  R.,  Boullón,  M.,  Bruguera,
 J., Crecente, R., González, X.: Copa: A Ge-Based Tool for Land Consolidation Projects.
 In: Proceedings of the Ninth ACM International Symposium on Advances in Geographic 
Information Systems, Atlanta, Georgia, pp. 53–58. ACM Press, New York (2001) 
41.  Zurita, G., Antunes, P., Baloian, N., Baytelman, F., Farias, A.: Visually-Driven Decision 
Making Using Handheld Devices. In: Zaraté, P., et al. (eds.) Collaborative Decison Mak-
ing: Prospectives and Challenges. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications, pp. 
257–269. IOS Press, Amsterdam (2008) 

42.  Hevner, A., March, S., Park, J., Ram, S.: Design Science in Information Systems Research. 

Management Information Systems Quarterly 28, 75–105 (2004) 

43.  Salmon, P., Stanton,  N.,  Jenkins,  D.,  Walker,  G.,  Young, M.,  Aujla,  A.:  What  Really  Is 
Going On? Review, Critique and Extension of Situation Awareness Theory. In: Harris, D. 
(ed.)  HCII  2007  and  EPCE  2007.  LNCS  (LNAI),  vol. 4562,  pp.  407–416.  Springer,  
Heidelberg (2007) 

 

