A Platform for Motivating Collaborative Learning Using 

Participatory Simulation Applications   

Gustavo Zurita

1

2
, Nelson Baloian

1
, Felipe Baytelman

, and Antonio Farias

1
 

1

 
Information Systems Department - Business School, Universidad de Chile  
2 
Computer Science Departments – Engineering School, Universidad de Chile  
gnzurita@fen.uchile.cl,nbaloian@dcc.uchile.cl, 

 

fbaytelm@dcc.uchile.cl, 

anfari@fen.uchile.cl 

Abstract.  Several  research  efforts  suggest  that  collaborative  participatory 
simulations  improve  teaching  and  learning,  increasing  motivation  inside  the 
classroom. Currently, it has been mainly applied with students of primary and 
secondary  educational  levels,  leaving  higher  level  students  aside.  This  paper 
presents  a  platform  for  implementing  participatory  simulations,  where  social 
interactions  and  motivational  effects  are  the  main  facilitators.  An  instance  of 
this platform was implemented for medicine school undergraduate students. Its 
implementation is simple, lightweight, fully based on pen-based interaction, and 
designed  to  work  with  handhelds  and  tablet-PC  over  an  ad-hoc  wireless 
network. The platform is able to support any kind of application implementing 
participatory simulation based on the exchange of artifacts among the learners. 

Keywords:  Techniques,  methods  and  tools  for  CSCW  in  design.  Other 
Keywords:  Handhelds.  Collaborative  Learning.  Participatory  Simulation. 
Learning Motivation. Gestures. Sketches. Freehand-input based. 

1   Introduction 

Some  research  groups  have  implemented  collaborative  learning  participatory 
simulations  with  handhelds,  tablet-PCs  and  infrared  beaming  [15],  and  it  has  been 
found that this kind of activities provide various advantages for teaching and learning: 
a)  they  introduce  an  effective  instructional  tool  and  have  the  potential  to  impact 
student  learning  positively  across  different  curricular  topics  and  instructional 
activities  [18],  (b)  they  increase  motivation  [8],  [2],  (c)  they  improve  engagement, 
self-directed learning and problem-solving  [8], and (d) they may stem from students 
having  “rich  conceptual  resources  for  reasoning  abut  and  thoughtfully  acting  in 
playful and motivational spaces, and thus can more easily become highly engaged in 
the subject matter” [7].  

Collaborative  learning  trough  participatory  simulations  use  the  availability  of 
mobile  computing  devices  having  the  capability  of  simple  data  exchanges  among 
neighboring devices [19], [5]. They enable students to act as agents in simulations in 
which overall patterns emerge from local decisions and information exchanges. Such 

K.-c. Hui et al. (Eds.): Edutainment 2007, LNCS 4469, pp. 957–970, 2007. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007 

958 

G. Zurita et al. 

simulations allow students to model and learn about several types of phenomena [3], 
in order to improve their knowledge about human behaviors, to help them in solving 
conflicts, to shape interaction protocols between humans, and to learn some aspects of 
collective  management,  games  and  experimental  economics  situations.  Due  to  the 
nature of participatory simulations, it can be used to support the learning and teaching 
of any kind of systems for which its general behavior emerges from the interaction of 
its agents. 

As stated in [13], new pedagogical practices for the whole classroom are required 
in  order  to  take  the  most  advantage  of  new  Technologies:  it  not  enough  to  provide 
each  classroom  with  handhelds  or  tablet-PCs  but  the  way  how  technology  meets 
education in a synergic way should be reinvented [14]. Computers have been already 
used  since  long  time  to  support  learning,  but  traditionally,  most  efforts  have  been 
directed  to  support  individual  learning  [1].  This  approach,  tough  very  effective  for 
some scenarios, fails to take advantage of what a collaborative learning can contribute 
to  the  whole  learning  process.  On  the  other  hand,  the  growing  acceptance  of 
handhelds and tablet-PCs enable users to take advantage of numerous advantages in 
scenarios that desktop computing cannot provide [8]. Handheld’s and tablet-PC most 
natural  data-entry  mode  is  the  stylus  (pen-based  or  freehand-input-based  system), 
which  imitates  the  mental  model  of  using  pen  and  paper,  thereby  enabling  users  to 
easily rough out their ideas and/or activating different functionalities like copy, move, 
delete,  etc.[10].  However,  most  currently  available  handheld  applications  adopt  the 
PC application approach that uses widgets instead of freehand-input-based paradigms 
(via touch screens) and/or sketching, [4].  

This  paper,  presents  a  collaborative  learning  experience  based  on  participatory 
simulations, having two general research goals: (a) to propose a conceptual platform 
for  specifying    participatory  simulations  using  handhelds  and  tablet-PCs,  (b) 
implementation  of  this  platform  to  be  managed  by  the  teacher  for  developing 
applications 
the  whole  classroom  of  participative  simulations  supporting 
motivating  learning  objectives,  and  (c)  to  determine  the  feasibility  of  using  this  in 
undergraduate  curricular  contexts  of  the  simulation  activities  both  in  terms  of 
intended  and  actualized  learning  outcomes;  particularly  in  the  medicine  area.  An 
instance  of  the  platform  is  described.  Its  implementation  is  simple,  lightweight  and 
fully based on wirelessly interconnected handhelds with an ad-hoc network.  

to 

2   Handheld and Tablet-PC in Whole-Classroom Participatory 

Simulations 

Handheld and tablet-PC computers provide advantages, which make this an especially 
attractive platform for developing participatory simulations for a whole class activity 
[12].  In  order  to  fully  take  advantage  of  this  hardware,  we  should  harness  common 
features  of  handhelds  and  tablet-PCS  including:  (a)  portability  –  students  can  move 
around within a classroom with their computing devices, (b) social interactivity – they 
can  exchange  data  and  collaborate  with  other  people  face-to-face,  (c)  context 
sensitivity–  mobile  devices  can  gather  data  unique  to  the  current  location, 
environment, and time, including both real and simulated data, (d) connectivity – it is 
possible  to  connect  handhelds  and  tablet-PCs  to  data  collection  devices,  other 

 

A Platform for Motivating Collaborative Learning 

959 

handhelds and tablet-PCs (ad-hoc network) that creates a true shared environment, (e) 
individuality  –  mobile  devices  can  provide  unique  scaffolding  that  is  customized  to 
the individual’s path of investigation. Our research project is to develop and examine 
a  new  participatory  simulation  platform  that  is  designed  from  the  ground  up  for 
handheld computers (used by students) and tablet-PC (used by the teacher) and draws 
on the unique affordances of these mobile technologies. Implicit to our research is the 
belief  that  a  powerful  handheld  learning  environment  might  capitalize  on  the 
portability, social interactivity, context sensitivity, connectivity, and individuality of 
ubiquitous  devices  to  bridge  real  and  virtual  worlds.  The  handhelds  and  tablet-PC 
then provides a window into the virtual context that is sensitive to information being 
supplied to it by the real world.  

A learning participatory simulation is a role-playing activity that helps to explain 
the coherence of complex and dynamic systems. The system maps a problem of the 
real world to a model with a fixed number of roles and rules. Global knowledge and 
patterns emerge in participatory simulations from local interactions among users and 
making  decisions  to  understand  the  impact  by  an  analysis  and  observation  while 
doing and/or at the end of the activity. Foundational concepts underpinning the design 
and use of collaborative learning participatory  simulations include (a) immersion of 
students  in  simulations  of  complex  phenomena;  (b)  development  of  inquiry  and 
research design skills by the reflections and analysis of the simulation; (c) negotiation, 
coordination and alignment of individual local behavior in order to foster group-level 
systems understanding.  

An  advantage  of  learning  participatory  simulations  is  the  fact  that  the  activity  is 
highly effective and motivating even in large groups (a whole class). A teacher could 
starts  or  not  with  an  introduction  where  he  or  she  explains  the  relevant  theoretical 
parts of the complex problem. At least the roles and rules need to be clearly specified. 
The  students  should  understand  the  possible  activities  and  consequences,  which  are 
available in the simulation at the end. The exchange of experiences and a discussion 
in small groups within or after the simulation help to increase the understanding of the 
simulated reality. A whole class activity of participatory simulations can be integrated 
in the lecture [12], where a major idea is the concept of learning through doing [9]. 
Students  participate  in  an  active  and  motivating  way,  analyze  information, 
interchange  information  among  them,  make  decisions  and  see  the  outcome  of  their 
actions.  

2.1   Principles of the Handheld and Tablet-PC Interface 

According to [10], [4] a handheld (and tablet-PC) application interface must imitate 
the  pen-and-paper  metaphor  so  users  can  interact  naturally  with  the  computer  in 
varied situations, especially  when they are or  need to be in  movement, thus  freeing 
them  to  concentrate  on  the  tasks  at  hand  instead  of  worrying  about  the  interface 
(interaction  with  keys,  menus,  widgets,  etc.).  A  pen-based  system  offers  a  more 
natural  and  intuitive  interface  enabling  the  sharing  and  exchange  of  design 
information so as to improve efficiency.  

Essential to the functioning of pen-based user interface is the use of gestures [11]. 
In  [5],  a  survey  intended  to  illuminate  the  problems  and  benefits  users  experience 
with gestures, it was found that the most frequent actions were deleting, selecting and 

960 

G. Zurita et al. 

moving, and that users consider these actions to be efficient as a form of interaction, 
as well as convenient, easy to learn, utilize and remember, and potentially an added 
advantage for the interface.

Finally, handhelds are an appropriate technology for providing high mobility and 
portability  in  physical  spaces  like  a  classroom,  and  for  creating  ad-hoc  networks 
through  peer-to-peer  connections  between  already  incorporated  WiFi  components 
(Dell Axim X50) jointly with a tablet-PC. Such network allows deliberate information 
exchange between users, as well as to automatically interaction between devices (sees 
section 5). Proximity detection is done  with infrared sensors (IrDA) combined  with 
WiFi.  

3   Developing a Platform  

Collaborative  learning  trough  participatory  simulations  with  handhelds  offer  an 
additional  perspective  providing  off-screen,  first  person  experience  and  insight  into 
the dynamics and emergent behavior, as students become agents in a complex system. 
Information and conceptual knowledge circulates through peer-to-peer interaction by 
the  interchange  and  negotiations  of  objects,  which  takes  different  forms  in  each 
simulation. We propose a platform for the specification, design and creation of mobile 
learning participatory simulations based on handhelds wirelessly interconnected.  

In order to generate, specify and implement applications of collaborative learning 
participatory  simulation,  the  teacher  defines  on  the  tablet-PC):  (a)  learning  goals  of 
the  reality  simulated,  (b)  artifacts  to  be  interchanged,  b)  behavior  variables  and 
parameters, and (c) rules and roles for playing the simulation (see section 4). Goals 
need  to  be  identified  in  order  to  let  students  successfully  learn/construct  certain 
knowledge.  These  goals  may  include  meta-objectives  and  they  are  only  a  mean  to 
achieve  an  overall  learning  objective.  Roles  and  rules  are  spread  among  students 
when the activity begins, but the teacher can also interact too.   

In  order  to  configure  the  system  for  a  collaborative  learning  participatory 
simulation,  the  Teacher  may  setup  transferable  objects  (artifacts),  their  behavior 
parameters,  rules  and  participant  roles  using  his/her  tablet-PC.  Then,  to  begin  the 
activity, the professor explains the goal of the activity to the students, also describing 
objects,  rules  and  roles,  and  how  these  concepts  are  represented  in  their  handhelds. 
Rules,  roles  and  goals  should  be  designed  to  achieve  (a)  a  high  social  interaction 
between  students,  (b)  negotiation  instances,  and  (c)  competition  to  encourage  an 
active  and  motivated  stance  as  if  students  where  playing  a  game  [9].  If  students 
require assistance, our platform allows the teacher to wirelessly give them feedback 
and assessment. The teacher can (a) observe the simulation state of each participant 
device and (b) modify such state in order to solve the student inquiry.   

Start-up  setup  must  ensure  students  play  always  an  active  and  dynamic  role 
through  time.  This  should  be  based  on  trading  between  students  (Negotiation 
component of Students, and Interchange Objects), or automatically among handhelds 
(Exchange  Objects).  These  conditions  depend  on  each  learning  participatory 
simulation  application  build,  and  may  involve  the  following  aspects:  (a)  type  of 
exchange objects, (b) exchange amounts, (c) trade conditions, (d) parameters before 
and after the exchange, and (e) exchange objects.  

 

A Platform for Motivating Collaborative Learning 

961 

If  students  require  assistance,  the  platform  allows  the  teacher  to  wirelessly  give 
them feedback and assessment. The teachers though the tablet-PC can (a) observe the 
simulation state of each participant handheld device and (b) modify such state in order 
to solve the student inquiry.  

Start-up  setup  must  ensure  students  play  always  an  active  and  dynamic  role 
through  time.  This  should  be  based  on  trading  between  students  (Negotiation 
component of Students, and Interchange Objects), or automatically among handhelds 
(Exchange  Objects).  These  conditions  depend  on  each  learning  participatory 
simulation  application  build,  and  may  involve  the  following  aspects:  (a)  type  of 
exchange objects, (b) exchange amounts, (c) exchange conditions, and (d) parameters 
before  and  after  the  exchange.  Once  the  simulation  is  done,  the  teacher  must  guide 
students’ understanding about the activity. In this way, the students will construct the 
learning objective together, analyzing different stages of the activity.  

4   A Scenario for Collaborative Learning Participatory Simulation 

In  this  section  we  describe  an  instance  of  the  platform  proposed  in  section  3.  It  is 
oriented  to  support  undergraduate  students  of  medicine  schools  to  learn  aspects 
related to the identification of illnesses trough their symptoms and the corresponding 
medication.  Students normally reinforce their knowledge about these aspects  with a 
lot  of  real  practice  accompanying  physicians.  They  have  to  develop  skills  on 
associating a certain set symptoms to the correct disease, since one symptom may be 
present in many diseases. Also medication can be different even for the same disease 
according to  the intensity of  the  symptoms.   We propose a scenario  where a  whole 
medicine  course  simulates  this  process  in  order  to  determine  the  illness  and  the 
corresponding medication based on a set of symptoms distributed to the handhelds of 
the  students.    Initially,  the  teacher  configures  a  set  of  diseases,  symptoms  and 
prescriptions  delimiting  the  tolerance  range  and  possibilities  they  can  present.  This 
information is distributed among the 20-30 medicine students of the whole class, so 
each student has at least one disease and various medical prescriptions and symptoms 
which  may  not  all  correspond  to  the  illness.  The  students  have  to  establish  face-toface 
encounters in order to exchange symptoms and medical prescriptions they may 
have  in  case  they  want  to  do  so.  This  exchange  of  information  and  the  discussion 
between  the  students  involved  should  reinforce  or  refute  their  knowledge  about  the 
corresponding  disease 
in  a  highly  participating  and  motivating  atmosphere. 
Handhelds in their turn act proactively informing students who put their devices close 
together if they have symptoms or prescriptions which they can exchange (according 
to the configuration established by the teacher at the beginning). Handhelds will only 
inform of this opportunity. Students should identify and decide if they exchange these 
elements.  

The  teacher  can  monitor  the  process  of  each  student  using  the  tablet-pc.  The 
teacher can also change the association parameters between symptoms, diseases and 
medical  prescription  during  the  experience.  A  correct  solution  by  a  student 
establishing  the  right  association  between  a  disease,  it  symptoms  and  the  right 
medication can be automatically determined comparing the student’s solution with the 
configuration  given by the teacher. Small deviations are allowed. It is also possible 

962 

G. Zurita et al. 

that cases unexpected by the teacher may arise during the experience. These can be 
assessed in real time by the teacher giving the corresponding feedback to the students.    

5   An Application Using the Platform 

We  have  implemented  a  lightweight  application  for  the  creation  of  participatory 
simulation  applications  based  on  the  platform  proposed  in  section  3.  Using  this 
platform we have successfully implemented an application for the scenario proposed 
on previous section. This application allows the teacher to organize and administrate 
the  simulation  using  a  Tablet.  The  teacher  can  create  "Medical  Conditions", 
“Treatments” and  “Symptoms”, and  let students organize  and link them  finding out 
the  optimum  configuration.  This  will  encourage  different  students  to  interact  with 
each other in order to trade their items (treatments and symptoms) in order to describe 
in the best way his or her assigned medical conditions.  

5.1   Simulation Management 

Items  design.  The  teacher  can  define  different  items,  which  may  represent  medical 
conditions, treatments and symptoms. In order to do this, he or she has to work under 
the “Define activity" mode. Here, the teacher can draw a sketch, type or hand-write 
the name of certain item and surround it within a rectangular shape. This will produce 
an  "item  icon",  displaying  an  awareness  of  successful  creation  and  displaying  a 
reduced  version  of  the  original  scratch.  Then,  additional  "goods  icons"  may  be 
created, as seen in Figure 1.a. Selecting a created item will display contextual options 
for choosing item type: "Medical Conditions", “Treatments” and “Symptoms” (Figure 
1.b).  Clicking  such  options  will  change  the  item’s  type.  Items  of  each  type  are 
displayed with different colors.  
Items linking. Once items of different types have been created, the teacher can relate 
“symptoms” and “treatments” to certain “medical conditions”. This is done drawing a 
line  that  starts  from  one  item  and  ends  in  another.  When  the  stylus  is  released,  an 
arrow  symbolizing  a  link  between  both  items  will  replace  such  sketched  line. 
Internally, the system will store the relation between these two items. When students 
reproduce this link they will get appropriate bonus.  
Activity  status  and  real  time  management.  Anytime  before  or  during  the 
simulation, the teacher can enter the “Define activity” mode and create new items, or 
alter  their  previous  relationship.  For  instance,  he  or  she  could  introduce  a  new 
treatment for an old medical condition, encouraging the students to keep searching for 
alternatives to their current individual configuration in their handhelds. Another mode 
is  the  “Activity  overview”,  which  presents  metrics  about  the  activity  status,  overall 
students’  assessment,  how  many  students  are  performing  correctly,  how  many  need 
help, and how much are students interacting with each other. 
Detailed  watching  and  teacher-student  interaction.  Entering  the  “Participants” 
mode  will  display  all  students’  current  screens  in  a  matrix,  allowing  the  teacher  to 
watch exactly what students are doing, which score they have, and who are interacting 
–  and  what  are  they  exchanging.  Figure  2  shows  an  example  participant's  screens 
summary. All students’ handhelds screens are reproduced scaled in order to fit them  
 

 

A Platform for Motivating Collaborative Learning 

963 

a 

b 

 

1.

Fig. 
  a) Teacher can create items by handwriting their names on the tablet-PC. Surrounding 
some sketches with a rectangle shape will define a new item. b) Selecting an item will show 
contextual options, which allow the teacher to choose selected item’s type.  

in the teacher screen.  Students' current action is also being displayed: in the image, 
first three students are linking their concepts, while Felipe and Pedro are exchanging 
items. The teacher can double click a student's screen in order to access a full scale 
mode where he or she can interact with the participant's configuration, both altering 
and assessing the student's actions. 

2.

Fig. 
  On  “Participants”  the  teacher  has  a  quick  summary  of  every  student's  screen.  In  this 
example, some students are drawing links while others (Felipe and Pedro) are exchanging items 
in  order  to  achieve  better  individual  configurations.  Exchanged  items  appear  bigger, 
highlighting them. 

 

964 

G. Zurita et al. 

5.2  Simulation Description  

When  the  activity  teacher  has  setup  the  simulation,  each  student  has  randomly 
assigned  “medical  conditions”,  “treatments”  and  “symptoms”.  Originally  assigned 
items  will  not  correspond  to  each  other,  so  students  will  have  to  start  seeking  for 
adequate  “treatments”  and  “symptoms”  for  their  assigned  “condition”.  Once  they 
exchange  their  items  for  the  corresponding  ones,  they'll  have  to  establish  links 
between them.  

Fig.  3.  Students  screen  displays  items  like  the  teacher's  screen.  Drawing  a  link  between 
two items will generate a link. Repeating such action will remove a previously generated link. 

 

3
3

Sudents'  screen  and  items  linking.  Assigned  and  exchanged  items  appear  in  the 
student's handheld screen, just as they would look in the teacher's tablet-PC, showing 
customs colors depending on the item's type. Students may establish different linking 
configurations  trying  to  find  the  optimal  relationship.  In  this  process,  each  student 
may  define  and  remove  links  between  concepts,  until  the  system  highlights  link  as 
“optimal”. Student may define links in the same way the teacher does so, by drawing 
a line from one item to the other (Figure  ).  
Item  exchange  between  students.  When  two  students  engage  in  a  face-to-face 
encounter, automatically  their handhelds display the exchange  mode. In  this screen, 
the lower area shows items currently owned by the student, while the upper area of 
the screen there are two negotiation spots: one where offered items may be dragged, 
and other  where engaged student's offered items are shown. Dragging an item  from 
the  owned  area  into  the  offered  area  (Figure 
)  will  include  such  item  into  the 
exchange.  On  the  other  hand,  when  the  trade  is  done  and  both  students  agree, 
dragging any of the items offered by the other switches current student's trade state to 
“accept”.  When  both  accept,  the  exchange  is  done,  transferring  items  between  both 
students.  
 

4

 

 

A Platform for Motivating Collaborative Learning 

965 

Fig.  4.  Two  students  exchange  items  through  a  face-to-face  encounter using  their handhelds. 
Dragging an item from the owned area (“My items”) into the offer zone will put such item on 
trade. 

 

6   Implementation  

The  System  was  implemented  over  a  platform  we  developed  previously  which 
supports the development of distributed applications for mobile devices over different 
platforms: Java and .NET. The middleware we developed consists of a set of classes 
implementing  an  API  the  programmer  can  use  in  order  to  write  distributed 
applications  easily.  These  classes  are  available  in  Java  and  C#  and  implement  the 
necessary mechanisms for converting data objects from their internal representations 
into  an  XML  representation,  transmit  them  across  platforms  and  convert  the  XML 
representation  into  the  corresponding  internal  one.  They  also  provide  and  start  the 
necessary  services  for  discovering  partners  present  in  the  ad-hoc  network  and 
establish  the  necessary  connections  among  the  different  applications  in  order  to 
synchronize shared data.   

6.1   Discovering Partners and Establishing the Connections 

Every  application  programmed  wit  our  platform  starts  a  service  which  will  send 
multicast  messages  at  regular  intervals  to  the  group  in  order  to  inform  other  participants 
of  the  presence  of  a  new  one.  It  will  also  start  consuming  multicast  messages 
from  other  partners  present  in  the  ad-hoc  network.  This  allows  the  application  to 
maintain  a  list  of  active  participants  updated.  Every  time  a  multicast  message of a 
new participant is received, its ID and IP number are stored in the list  and a TCP/
IP connection is established with that application through which data will  be 
shared.    If  a  certain  amount  of  time  has  passed  without  receiving  a  multicast 
message from a member of the list of active participants, its entry is deleted and the 
connection  to  that  application  closed.  The  Figure  5  shows  the  structure  of  the 

966 

G. Zurita et al. 

communication node present in all applications developed with the platform. It has a 
module which manages threads for sending and receiving multicast packages used to 
maintain  an  active  partners  list.  This  list  is  used  by  another  module  which  is 
responsible for creating TCP/IP connections  with the active partners and destroying 
them for those partners which left the group and transmit synchronization data.   

6.2   Sharing Objects  

The data sharing mechanism is based on a “shared objects” principle. A shared object 
is an abstract class which should be extended in order to create an object class whose 
state  will  be  transmitted  to  all  active  participants  when  the  object  changes  its  state, 
this is when one or more variables change their value. The programmer implements a 
shared  object  by  extending  the  SharedObject  abstract  class.  The  synchronization  of 
the shared objects is achieved by transmitting a copy of it to all partners every time 
their  state  is  changed.  For  this,  methods  for  sending  and  receiving  objects  were 
designed  and  implemented.  At  the  beginning  these  methods  were  private  to  the 
middleware, but very soon we discovered that many small yet powerful applications 
could be implemented very easily based on those methods without having to use the 
SharedObject class. Therefore we made these methods public to the API. In order to 
transmit  an  object  across  platforms  we  need  a  way  to  represent  objects  common  to 
both platforms: this is XML. When the application must update the state of an object 
it is passed to a serializer which produces an XML representation. This description is 
then sent to the communication node of the other application. The receiving node uses 
its  own  de-serializer  for  transforming  the  XML  representation  in  the  corresponding 
internal one. 

TCP/IP connections to other applications for 

transmitting/receiving objects 

Multicast UDP traffic for discovering and

discarding partners

TCP/IP connections manager

Multicast discovery manager

Communication Node 

Active partners list 

 

Fig.  . The structure of the communication node 

5

6.3   Group Management 

The face-to-face edutainment scenario was the first situation that motivated us to for 
developing  this  middleware  because  of  the  need  to  have  applications  implemented 
and running in different platforms to share data. In this scenario, we also recognized 
the  need  to  have  the  possibility  of  defining  subgroups  of  partners  inside  the  whole 
group  of  active  participants.  For  example,  the  teacher  may  want  to  propose  a  task 
which  should  be  accomplished  by  small  groups  which  do  interact  among  them,  but 
she wants to keep the possibility of looking what the different groups are doing. For 
this we developed the necessary mechanisms inside the middleware in order to have 

 

A Platform for Motivating Collaborative Learning 

967 

applications  join  and  leave  certain  groups.  This  information  is  stored  in  the 
communication  node  and  is  used  when  the  copy  of  an  updated  object  has  to  be 
distributed  among  participants.  Accordingly,  we  developed  the  methods  which  will 
send objects only to applications belonging to a certain group. An application can join 
more than one group, so it can receive updates coming from different groups. We also 
implemented methods for remotely force an application to join and/or leave a group. 
This  was necessary because in  many cases, the teacher or the  moderator of a group 
was supposed to form smaller working groups. The teacher or moderator can then join 
the various in order to “see” what was happening on all of them.  

7   Related Work and Discussion 

Throughout much of the fifty-year history of participatory simulations, computational 
technologies have played a central role. Nowadays, the ‘participatory’ aspect of these 
simulations  can  be  enhanced  by  available  technology,  which  gives  support  for  the 
roles and rules to be distributed among the students. Researchers are highly interested 
in collaborative learning participatory simulations due to these simulations appear to 
make very difficult ideas around ‘distributed systems’ and ‘emergent behavior’ more 
accessible to students [19]. Furthermore the participatory simulation embeds student 
engagement  and  motivation  in  a  playful  social  space  [2]  where  they  have  rich 
conceptual  resources  for  reasoning  about  and  thoughtfully  acting  in  playful  spaces, 
and  thus  can  more  easily  become  highly  engaged  in  the  subject  matter.  Different 
hardware devices were used to implement participatory simulations.  

Colella  et  al.  [3]  developed  wearable  computational  badges  (or  "thinking  tags") 
that  allow  users  to  move  freely  while  communicating  information  between  badges. 
Colella,  researched  about  student  learning  with  one  of  the  first  instances  of  a 
participatory simulation supported by a thin layer of computing technology. Disease 
propagation  models  are  natural  candidates  for  this  kind  of  participatory  simulation 
and  have  been  implemented  by  a  number  of  researchers  and  curriculum  developers 
[16].  

Klopfer et al. [6] describes a prototype about “Environmental Detectives,” which is 
a participatory simulation experience  where groups of  students participate in a realtime 
 simulation  based  on  a  local  watershed.  The  real-world  watershed  includes 
streams, trees, and other natural elements. This real-world situation is then augmented 
by  a  simulation  of  an  environmental  disaster;  in  this  case  the  river  being  polluted. 
Handheld  computers  implement  a  simulation  where  students  can  take  air  and  water 
readings, interview people and get geographical information.   

Tomlinson [17] presented a novel interaction paradigm for multi-user participatory 
simulations which involves desktop PC screens that serve as virtual islands populated 
by autonomous 3D animated creatures, and mobile devices, such as tablet PCs, that 
serve as virtual rafts that participants may use to carry creatures between the islands. 
This  paper  described  how  this  “Island/Raft”  paradigm  may  serve  as  an  interactive 
platform  for  education  in  several  different  content  domains,  and  presented  a 
functional implementation of the paradigm. The system is able to present content in 
ways that are of interest to learners and growing effectiveness as educational tools.  

968 

G. Zurita et al. 

HubNet  [19]  is  an  architecture  designed  to  give  students  the  experience  of 
participating as elements in a simulation of a complex dynamic system. HubNet is an 
open  client-server  architecture,  which  enables  many  users  at  the  "Nodes"  to  control 
the behavior of individual objects or agents and to view the aggregated results on a 
central  computer  known  as  the  "Hub".  This  network  of  nodes  is  integrated  with  a 
powerful suite of modeling, analysis and display tools that, together, give the capacity 
to  "fly"  the  system  in  intuitive  mode,  to  reflect  on  the  emergent  result  of  the 
simulation  and  to  encode  student  strategies  as  rules  which  the  system  can  then  run 
independently. The network layer implements flexible communication protocols that 
include the ability to upload and download data sets, upload and download program, 
monitor key-presses at the handheld computer level, support real-time interaction as 
in network computer games, and form collaborative groups of various sizes: peer to 
peer, small groups, and whole class modes.  

Klopfer et al. [12] showed that the newer and more easily distributable version of 
Participatory  Simulations  on  handhelds  was  equally  as  capable  as  the  original  Tagbased 
simulations in engaging students collaboratively in a complex problem-solving 
task.  They  feel  that  handhelds  technology  holds  great  promise  for  promoting 
collaborative  learning  as  teachers  struggle  to  find  authentic  ways  to  integrate 
technology  into  the  classroom  in  addition  to  engaging  and  motivating  students  to 
learn  science.  The  fact  that  handhelds  can  display  results  in  a  more  attractive  way 
suggests  that  they  might  be  a  more  motivating  platform  for  implementing 
participatory simulations.  

A  collaborative  learning  participatory  simulation  implementing  a  stock  exchange 
scenario  was  designed  for  master’s  students  in  financial  theory,  using  architectures 
based  on  a  server  and  clients  running  on  desktop  PCs  or  laptops  as  well  as  on 
handhelds, [13].  

Based on the literature above mentioned, we have identified that no system has yet 
been  proposed  or  implemented  for  handhelds  in  a  wireless  ad-hoc  network  using  a 
pen-based interface as main metaphor for user interaction. We believe that the most 
significant contribution of the work reported here is to provide a conceptual platform 
for applications of collaborative learning participatory simulations,  which is easy to 
adapt  to  many  subject-matter  content  knowledge  and  undergraduate  curricular 
integration and encouraging the adoption of learner-centered strategies. The teachers, 
who pre-evaluate the application, suggest that the same technologies and ideas could 
be  used  across  many  subject  matter  areas.  The  design  of  effective  learning 
environments  of  our  conceptual  platform  have  included  (a)  learner  centered 
environment  (learners  construct  their  own  meanings),  (b)  knowledge-centered 
environment  (learners  connect  information  into  coherent  wholes  and  embedding 
information in a context), (c) assessment-centered environment (learner use formative 
and  summative  assessment  strategies  and  feedback),  and  (d)  community-centered 
environments (learner  work in collaborative learning norms). The next phase of our 
investigations  will  develop  and  explore  more  subject-specific  applications  and 
learning  and  motivational  measures  at  the  student  level.  In  fact,  another  application 
was already developed with the goal of learning the building of confidence between 
buyers and sellers [20]. The first results of the testing of our prototypes indicate that 
the  developed  platform  is  the  right  approach  to  support  the  implementation  of 
participatory simulations and that they can play a positive role supporting the learning 
of various systems in a motivating way.   

 

A Platform for Motivating Collaborative Learning 

969 

Acknowledgments. This paper was funded by Fondecyt 1050601. 

References 

1.  Campbell,  A.,  Pargas,  R.:  Laptops  in  the  classroom,  Proceedings  of  the  34th  SIGCSE 
technical symposium on Computer science education, Reno, Navada, USA, (2003),  98102.
  

2.  Colella,  V.:  Participatory  simulations:  Building  collaborative  understanding  through 
immersive  dynamic  modeling”. The  Journal of  the  Learning  Sciences  9,  2000, pp. 471–
500.  

3.  Colella,  V.,  Borovoy,  R.,  Resnick,  M.:  Participatory  simulations:  Using  computational 
objects  to  learn  about  dynamic  Systems,  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing 
Systems, (1998), 9 – 10.  

4.  Dai,  G.,  Wang,  H.:  Physical  Object  Icons  Buttons  Gesture  (PIBG):  A  new  Interaction 

Paradigm with Pen, Proceedings of CSCWD 2004, LNCS 3168, (2005), 11-20.  

5.  Hinckley,  K.,  Baudisch,  P.,  Ramos,  G.,  Guimbretiere,  F.:  Design  and  Analysis  of 
Delimiters for Selection-Action Pen Gesture Phrases in Scriboli, Proceeding of CHI 2005, 
ACM, (2005), 451-460.  

6.  Klopfer,  E.,  Perry,  J.,  Squire,  K.,  Jan,  M.:  Collaborative  learning  through  augmented 
reality  role  playing,  Proceeding  of  Computer  support  for  collaborative  learning,  Taipei, 
Taiwan, ACM, (2005), 311-315.  

7.  Klopfer,  E.,  Yoon,  S.,  Perry,  J:  Using  Palm  Technology  in  Participatory  Simulations  of 
Complex Systems: A New Take on Ubiquitous and Accessible Mobile Computing, Journal 
of Science Education and Technology, 14(3), (2005), 285-297.   

8.  Klopfer, E., Yoon, S., Rivas, L.: Comparative  analysis of Palm and wearable computers 
for  Participatory  Simulations,  Journal  of  Computer  Assisted  Learning,  20,  (2004),  347–
359.  

9.  Kopf, S., Scheele, N. Winschel, L., Effelsberg, W.: Improving Activity and Motivation of 
Students with Innovative Teaching and Learning Technologies, International Conference 
on Methods and Technologies for Learning (ICMTL), WIT press, (2005), 551 – 556.   

10.  Landay, J., Myers, B.: Sketching interfaces: Toward more human interface design, IEEE 

Computer, 34(3), (2001), 56-64  

11.  Long, A., Landay, J., Rowe, L.: PDA and gesture Use in Practice: Insights for Designers 

of Pen-based User Interfaces, Retrieved on 2006, December, from   
http://bmrc.berkeley.edu/research/publications/1997/142/clong.html       

12.  Moher,  T.,  Wiley,  J.:  Technology  Support  for  Learning  Scientific  Control  as  a  Whole 
Class.  Paper  presented  at  the  Annual  Conference  of  the  American  Education  Research 
Association, San Diego, CA., (2004).  

13.  Swan,  K.,  Cook,  D.,  Kratcoski, A.,  Lin,  Y.,  Schenker,  J.,    van  ‘t  Hooft,  M.:  Ubiquitous 
computing:  rethinking  teaching,  learning  and  technology  integration,  Education  and 
technology:  Issues  and  applications,  policy,  and  administration,  In  S.  Tettegah  &  R. 
Hunter (Eds.) , New York: Elsevier, 2006, 231-252.  

14.  Roschelle,  J.:  Keynote  paper:  Unlocking  the  learning  value  of  wireless  mobile  devices, 

Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 19 (3), (2003), 260–272.  

15.  Soloway,  E.,  Norris,  C.,  Blumenfeld,  P.,  Fishman,  R.,  Marx,  R:  Devices  are  Ready-atHand,
 Communications of the ACM, 44(6), (2001), 15–20.  

16.  Stor,  M.  &  Briggs,  W.:  Dice  and  disease  in  the  classroom.  The  Mathematics  Teacher, 

91(6). (1998), 464-468.  

17.  Tomlinson,  B.:    A  heterogeneous  animated  platform  for  educational  participatory 
simulations, Proceedings of Computer support for collaborative learning. Taipei, Taiwan, 
(2005), 677 – 681.  

970 

G. Zurita et al. 

18.  Vahey, P., Crawford, V.: Palm Education Pioneers Program: Final Evaluation Report, SRI 

International, Menlo Park, CA, (2002).   

19.  Wilensky,  U.,  Stroup,  W.:  Learning  through  participatory  simulations:  Network-based 
design  for  systems  learning  in  Classrooms,  Proceedings  of  the  Computer  Supported 
Collaborative Learning Conference (CSCL’99) (eds. C. Hoadley & J. Roschelle), Erlbaum 
Associates, Mahwah, NJ, (1999), 667-676.   

20.  Zurita, G., Baloian, N., Baytelman, F., Antunes, P.: A Framework like a tool for specify 
motivating Collaborative Learning Participatory Simulations, Proceedings of the CSCWD 
Conference, Melbourne, Australia, May 2007.   

