Crowdsourcing and Knowledge Co-creation

in Virtual Museums

Daniel Biella1, Daniel Sacher1, Benjamin Weyers2, Wolfram Luther1(✉),

Nelson Baloian3, and Tobias Schreck4

1 University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany

{daniel.biella,daniel.sacher,wolfram.luther}@uni-due.de

2 RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany
weyers@vr.rwth-aachen.de
3 University of Chile, Santiago, Chile

nbaloian@dcc.uchile.cl

4 Graz University of Technology, Graz, Austria

tobias.schreck@cgv.tugraz.at

Abstract.  This paper gives an overview on crowdsourcing practices in virtual
museums. Engaged nonprofessionals and specialists support curators in creating
digital 2D or 3D exhibits, exhibitions and tour planning and enhancement of
metadata  using  the  Virtual  Museum  and  Cultural  Object  Exchange  Format
(ViMCOX).  ViMCOX  provides  the  semantic  structure  of  exhibitions  and
complete museums and includes new features, such as room and outdoor design,
interactions with artwork, path planning and dissemination and presentation of
contents. Application examples show the impact of crowdsourcing in the Museo
de Arte Contemporaneo in Santiago de Chile and in the virtual museum depicting
the life and work of the Jewish sculptor Leopold Fleischhacker. A further use case
is devoted to crowd-based support for restoration of high-quality 3D shapes.

Keywords: Crowdsourcing  ·  Co-creation  ·  Virtual  museum  ·  Knowledge
creation · Digital 3D exhibits · Standardized metadata · ViMEDEAS · ViMCOX

1

Introduction and Motivation

Crowdsourcing and co-creation are major players in an emerging ﬁeld of research on
collaborative systems. The technologies available nowadays, such as smartphones and
social networks, enable people to provide and consume information in ways that were
never possible before. But to what extent can these emerging technologies and changes
in everyday life positively inﬂuence the ﬁelds of information systems and technology
research? In this paper, we explore how crowdsourcing can be used in virtual museums
(VMs) by creating and visiting virtual exhibits in various use cases. The main goal of
this proposed extension of virtual museums is the enrichment of the virtual environment
with information from engaged users (such as their preferred viewpoints, comments and
search histories) and the generation of additional input for the curation of new museums
and exhibits.

© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
N. Baloian et al. (Eds.): CRIWG 2015, LNCS 9334, pp. 1–18, 2015.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-22747-4_1

2

D. Biella et al.

Biella [1] provides a comprehensive literature review that describes various kinds
of VMs as digital heritage content, including virtual exhibits of replicated historical
laboratories for the purpose of study, education and leisure. VMs and exhibits need
digital reconstruction and interpretation of existing or lost artwork and their metadata,
which can be deduced from existing items, photos, drawings or descriptions in books,
oral tradition, expert knowledge or available metadata and recorded in a standardized
metadata format. The digital representations of the artwork are then placed into a spatio‐
temporal context realized as indoor or outdoor exhibition space and hyperlinked to
context-related information that will help visitors comprehend the digital interpretation
[2]. Furthermore, through interaction with objects, displayed or spoken texts, thematic
tours and electronic catalogues or tour movies, visitors can convey ideas and concepts.
In addition to the properties listed above, a VM metadata standard is also expected

to support the following features [3]:
• Description of requirements concerning the presentation of exhibits and an adequate

context (carrier, wall, room, lighting and so on);

• Speciﬁcation of interaction methods with exhibits via adequate interfaces and rever‐

sibility to the original state after user interaction;

• Modiﬁcation of exhibits with regard to position, form and content, even with the aim

of creating new enhanced instances of one or more cultural objects;

• Simulation of a kind deﬁned by a discrete or continuous process model.
In an earlier paper [2], we described the framework Replicave, developed by Biella [1]
in 2006, which provides a cost-eﬃcient way to create virtual exhibits by reusing 3D
models and generating additional digital content dynamically. Its successor, Replicave2,
developed by Sacher [3], uses X3D and X3DOM as rendering platforms and Java EE
and the Tomcat servlet container to present exhibits online. The virtual environments
can be created using customizable exhibition area templates, such as entrance halls,
galleries,  various  media-rooms  and  additional  interactive  experiments.  Replicave2
allows dynamic generation of arbitrary room designs, depending on given parameters
and metadata designs speciﬁed in the VM modeling language ViMCOX. The main
contribution of this paper is to present a concept that focuses on content development
and enhancement realized by participatory practices and crowdsourcing, especially for
Web-based museums and virtual science centers.

The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces related work and focuses on
the role of crowdsourcing approaches in various contexts. The discussion will show how
these evolving techniques can be embedded into the creation and visiting process of
VMs. Then we introduce several new approaches for the use of crowdsourcing concepts
in creating (Sect. 3) and visiting (Sect. 4) VMs. Section 5 shows the feasibility of these
concepts by examining three case studies. Section 6 develops a research agenda, and
Sect. 7 discusses our conclusions and presents future work.
2 Related Work

Crowdsourcing on social platforms aﬀecting social interaction is an emerging form of
knowledge generation and problem solving that complements well-known practices of

Crowdsourcing and Knowledge Co-creation in Virtual Museums

3

collaboration  and  co-creation.  Nguyen  et  al. [4]  deﬁne crowdsourcing  as  an online
strategy in which an organization proposes deﬁned task(s) to the members of the crowd
via a ﬂexible open call in order to harness their work, knowledge, skills and/or experi‐
ence. They go on to provide a structured literature review, describing how to decide
when to use crowdsourcing. Platforms enabling crowdsourcing oﬀer calls to the crowd,
asking for them to provide information in a meaningful way that supports the creation
and use of a VM.

Many websites, including Wikipedia, Open Street Map and Second Life, illus‐
trate important examples of crowdsourcing. We will not enter into a deep discussion
about the differences between crowdsourcing and collaboration and will summarize
only some of the opinions found on the web. Often, crowdsourcing and the evalua‐
tion of requested data go hand in hand with statistical evaluation. If the most prob‐
able solutions or averaging is needed, crowdsourcing seems to be a good choice
since those involved work mostly independently and individually. Crowdsourcing
can  also  bring  new  ideas,  special  knowledge  and  innovation  into  a  community,
whereas collaboration seeks to solve a specific problem or complete a specific task
by integrating mutually complementary competences and experiences—a goal which
demands qualified project management. But perhaps the best results can be achieved
through a good mix of the two. As Benson [5] observes, “co-creation is a collabora‐
tive initiative which operates like crowdsourcing by seeking information and ideas
from  a  group  of  people.  There  is,  however,  one  crucial  difference.  The  call  for
contributions is not put to an open forum or platform but to a smaller group of indi‐
viduals with specialized skills and talents.”

Uden and Zipf’s [6] Volunteered Geographic Information (VGI)-based approach to
3D city modeling seems promising and expands the options for crowdsourcing 3D city
models. They present a concept for a new Web platform called OpenBuildingModels,
which allows the models to be linked to Open Street Map objects and displayed by a
dedicated 3D viewer.

Colﬁ [7] provides an overview of key issues that are related to social and cooperative
interactions—particularly around the design and use of technology—at heritage sites
that have emerged in CSCW and that involve the conduct and the activities of visitors,
the design and evaluation of interactive installations for guidance and access, and the
creation of novel artistic performances and interactions with exhibits.

These areas of interest are defined in greater detail by Baloian and Zurita [8], who
suggest using guidelines in the knowledge creation process that will also apply in
modified form within the crowdsourcing and co-creation scenario in VMs: (a) it is
necessary  to  consider  a  knowledge  creation  model  based  on  crowdsourcing  to
organize human resources, knowledge creation and the task-completion process; (b)
in complex contexts like 3D virtual environments, content and metadata creation and
enhancement require crowd selection and motivation and the exploitation, valida‐
tion and dissemination of knowledge; (c) knowledge creation in mobile scenarios
visiting indoor and outdoor expositions demands an appropriate hardware and soft‐
ware platform, as well as new types of interaction support and guidance and meta‐
data collection using current standards.

4

D. Biella et al.

Using content produced by crowdsourcing requires an appropriate online platform
that eases the transformation of 3D models and metadata into the right formats. The
Virtual Museum and Cultural Object Exchange Format ViMCOX [9] has been devel‐
oped in order to provide a semantic structure for exhibits and complete museums. The
standard supports the hierarchical description of VMs and provides stylistic devices for
sophisticated and lifelike exhibit design, interactive exhibits, assets, and outdoor areas.
ViMCOX is based on international metadata standards and uses LIDO version 1.0 as its
interchange and harvesting format for cultural objects.

Simon [10] lists ﬁve stages of social participation in a VM, where each stage has
something special to oﬀer to visitors. Stage one equips them with access to the content
they seek. Stage two provides an opportunity for inquiry, in which visitors can take
action and ask questions. Stage three allows them to see where their interests and actions
ﬁt in the wider community of visitors to the institution. Stage four helps them connect
with particular people—staﬀ members and other visitors—who share their content and
activity interests. Stage ﬁve makes the entire institution feel like a social place, full of
potentially interesting, challenging, and enriching encounters with other people.

In contrast, our focus is to ask what visitors have to oﬀer the VM during the ﬁve
stages when they are accessing content, interacting with artwork, asking  questions,
taking their own tour and communicating with other people.

An example of this is described by Rodriguez Echavarria et al. [11]. People in local
communities were invited to take photographs of the objects in the collection of public
monuments and sculptures in the city of Brighton and Hove in the United Kingdom and
upload them to a website along with provenance information. In this way, the same
object was photographed at diﬀerent times and from diﬀerent perspectives, increasing
the amount of data and thus helping to produce a quality 3D shape using computer vision
techniques. In this way, crowdsourcing enables the generation of several 3D shapes
representing the same object at diﬀerent times.

Morin [12] discusses how crowdsourcing improves Web3D user navigation. User
interactions are collected in order to detect meaningful elements in a 3D object and to
simplify 3D navigation. Recommended views are computed and suggested to subse‐
quent users. A similar approach is described by Nghiem [13], who proposes a new
paradigm based on crowdsourcing to facilitate online 3D interactions that consists of
analyzing 3D user interactions to identify regions of interest (ROIs) and generating
recommendations  to  subsequent  users.  The  paradigm  also  includes  crowdsourcing
activities for building semantic associations between text and 3D visualizations. The
links produced are suggested to upcoming users so they can easily locate 3D visualiza‐
tions associated with particular textual content.

Dallas [14] suggests a guestbook presented as a separate section of the virtual exhi‐
bition website and accessible through a link labelled “Reﬂections” in the permanent
navigation bar of the exhibit. It is organized in sections, mirroring the internal structure
of the actual exhibit, and visitors are asked to contribute to discussions by responding
to a predeﬁned question for each individual section. Admittedly, a guestbook is meant
to address a public audience, not to open up interaction between communities of active
participants. There are, however, some instances where visitors interact.

Crowdsourcing and Knowledge Co-creation in Virtual Museums

5

In Carletti et al. [15], a web survey was carried out on 36 crowdsourcing projects
promoted by galleries, libraries, archives, museums and educational institutions. The
authors  provide  classiﬁcation  for  crowdsource  tasks  akin  to  common  curator  tasks
(selecting, classifying, describing, maintaining) and public participation models:
• Classiﬁcation—gathering descriptive metadata related to an object in a collection;
• Contextualization—adding contextual knowledge to objects;
• Collection integration/completion;
• Co-curation—using the inspiration/expertise of non-professional curators to create

(web exhibitions);

• Crowdfunding—collective cooperation to support eﬀorts initiated by others.
In conclusion, there are several proposals in the literature that support the construction
and operation of VMs and exhibits by crowdsourcing; however what is missing is a
complete taxonomy of such activities and a coherent architectural approach that oﬀers
tools providing feedback information from crowdsourcing to the creation process of
virtual museums.

Now we want to redeﬁne the activity of digital curation:  Digital  curation (e.g.,
Digital Curation Center: (http://www.dcc.ac.uk/) is the maintenance of digital research
data throughout its lifecycle: re-usability of metadata, surrogates and other media or
digital assets. This includes the development of digital repositories and, more impor‐
tantly, the deﬁnition of guidelines and workﬂows for purposes such as digitization,
documentation, presentation, transfer and preservation (interoperability, encoding/formats,
 standards, vocabularies, tool chains, services) as well as the transformation and
combination of artworks to create new instances. Challenges in co-curation and digital
curation  include  documenting  provenance  and  applying  digital  rights  management
(DRM), for example, transfer of ownership.

Next,  we  focus  on  the  generation  of  knowledge  regarding  the  co-curation  of
museums and exhibits. The following factors are key in the crowdsourcing approach:
• There are three important stages of supporting curators in building expositions and

visitors in exploring VMs through crowdsourcing:
• Co-curating: Online creation or enhancement of digital 2/3D exhibits and contri‐

buting metadata;

• Supporting visitors as they select and publish tours on the museum’s platform,

navigate in the 3D environment and interact with exhibits;

• Discussing additional content and creating appropriate context using the elec‐
tronic guestbook. Visitors are invited to use their smartphones to take photos and
comment on the exhibit. This material can be used to enhance the exhibit.

• Two types of human capital are involved:

• People in the crowd are motivated and have appropriate knowledge to contribute;
• People working in house gather material, execute quality control and integrate
exhibits and metadata into the VM using a VM metadata standard like ViMCOX
and applying a DRM strategy.

• An adequate communication platform is needed, including interfaces that make collec‐
tion of information and transformation to standardized datatypes accessible to the crowd.

6

D. Biella et al.

In most cases, the artwork is copyrighted and curators are requested to adopt a high
quality DRM. Thus, building and operating a VM requires the cooperation of several
stakeholders. The owners of the artwork must grant permission for the creation of digital
3D representations and their dissemination via the Internet or a standalone system under
certain conditions, such as watermarking the exhibit and displaying copyright informa‐
tion concerning limitation of use and propagation. The curator provides metadata and
exposition layout, which are part of the copyright agreement. The software engineer
organizes the creation of digital representations together with their metadata, installs
protection and builds a VM, which is hosted on a server, kiosk system or other appro‐
priate platform. Volunteers and visitors are invited and encouraged to contribute to the
exhibition and must sign oﬀ on copyright agreements prohibiting abusive use and distri‐
bution of digital artwork.

As an alternative, leading museums abstain from watermarking and use the Open
Archives Initiative Protocol for Metadata Harvesting (OAI-PMH). The OAI is an organ‐
ization that develops and applies technical interoperability standards that allow archives
to share catalog information (metadata). It attempts to build a low-barrier interopera‐
bility  framework  for  archives  (institutional  repositories)  containing  digital  content
(digital libraries) and allows people (service providers) to harvest metadata (from data
providers). Open data collections such as Europeana, 3D Icons, Web Gallery of Arts
and Wikipedia, together with cultural heritage institutional (OAI-PMH) repositories
include metadata records, knowledge bases and corresponding interfaces for re-use of
assets and artworks. The Rijksmuseum OAI application program interface collection
(https://www.rijksmuseum.nl/en/api/),  for  example,  is  a  set  of  more  than  110,000
descriptions  of  objects  (metadata)  and  digital  images.  Through  suitable  APIs,  the
museum provides a state-of-the-art service for application developers that makes collec‐
tions available for use in web applications. As mentioned in [16], the Yale Center for
British Art (YCBA) and the Rijksmuseum release high resolution images, thumbnails
and metadata of their collections and artworks licensed under creative commons and
public domain licenses using OAI-PMH. The Rijksmuseum releases metadata records
as Dublin Core data sets, and the YCBA collection metadata is available in the LIDO
format. This allows the combination of artwork surrogates and sophisticated metadata
elaborated by domain experts with generative VMs to let the public curate individual
exhibits.
3 Supporting Curators Through Crowdsourcing:

Building Exhibits

As discussed in the introduction and literature review, crowdsourcing can have various
beneﬁts for the generation and curation of VMs and their exhibits. It can oﬀer concepts
and ideas, 3D models, metadata and work contexts. One of the most cogent arguments
for crowdsourcing digital 3D models is that generating them involves high costs; with
crowdsourcing, these models can be visualized and stored or exported together with
appropriate textures to modern 3D printers. Similarly, an appropriate DRM can be used
to combine community contributions to administrative and descriptive metadata with
technical and use metadata provided by the institution.

Crowdsourcing and Knowledge Co-creation in Virtual Museums

7

Although  high-quality  3D  modeling  is  a  task  for  specialists,  involving  engaged
volunteers can help reduce costs. Volunteer involvement can be supported with software
based on game consoles and open-source modeling software (e.g., low-cost 3D scanning
and  modeling  with  MS  Kinect  and  ReconstructMe)  and  contribute  metadata  by
respecting XML-based standards. However, in the museum community there are no
simple  solutions  for  both  because  a  lot  of  preand 
 post-processing  is  needed  and
comfortable interfaces are lacking. Generally, reconstructing software includes a viewer
or editor that allows for inspecting or repairing and annotating the 3D shapes, which are
afterwards stored in the exhibition repository and can be searched and selected within
their local and temporal context using keywords from descriptive metadata.

Typically, one of two scanning principles is implemented: cameras or lasers moving
around the object or a ﬁxed camera setup with objects revolving on a turning table. Other
image-based approaches are the Arc 3D web service (www.arc3d.be/) and the propri‐
etary 123D Catch from Autodesk (www.123dapp.com/catch), which allows 3D digiti‐
zation  using  modern  smartphones.  A  comparative  overview  on  existing  models  is
provided in [17], which discusses multiple applications for 3D scanning, modeling and
printing and provides an overview of future directions for this technology, such as 3D
video capture. To create the 3D model from the image data, several software packages
can be utilized to produce a triangulated surface or a mesh object and to process the
color information of the object being scanned.

To mention only one system we cite MeshLab as an open source, portable, extensible
system for the editing and processing, subdividing, converting, repairing and coloring
of unstructured 3D triangular meshes (http://meshlab.sourceforge.net/).

The Fraunhofer IGD also provides a service for the preparation of 3D models for
Web-based presentations utilizing X3DOM (http://publica.Fraunhofer.de/documents/
N-264523.html). This service was tailored for the cultural heritage domain to ease the
use of scanned and complex 3D models in VM applications.

Let us come back to the impact of the crowd in the generation phase. Volunteers use
(1) an open source software tool for capturing 3D data from real objects using (2) an
aﬀordable 3D scanner, such as the Kinect, (3) reconstruction software that produces
textured 2D or 3D models and (4) a Web-based interface for checking and transferring
the model, rights and metadata. In general, the process should be completely runnable
on mobile devices, especially content capture.

On the curator’s side, post-processing is done by the VM staﬀ on workstations or in
a reduced form on mobile devices. An enhanced platform provides automatic postprocessing 
facilities together with a Web-based interface for entering the 2D/3D content,
metadata and copyright information.

It is important to deﬁne a versatile hardware environment to host the exhibition, for
instance, a kiosk system with a modiﬁed operation mode prohibiting unauthorized user
actions and an adequate user interface supporting user navigation, interaction, text input
and multilingual text and speech output and logging functionalities.

Clear software requirements and standardized data formats facilitate seamless inte‐
gration of contributed content. An extensive test program must include veriﬁcation of
software stability in accordance with the ISO/IEC/IEEE 29119 norm, stress tests for
ﬂuent navigation and display, and conﬁrmation of complete and correct realization of

8

D. Biella et al.

the curator’s content speciﬁcations and failure-free system operation over a speciﬁed
time. Further recommendations are given in the next section and the use cases.

4 Enhancing Exhibitions Through Crowdsourcing:

Collaborative Knowledge Creation and Management

There are several ways to collect knowledge or information during or after a user’s
visit by using communication or voting tools and interaction interfaces, which may
be integrated into the VM or accessed separately. Important means are input forms
for entering text or formatted metadata, special purpose interfaces for interacting
with the exhibit or an electronic guestbook where users can comment on the exhibit
or ask questions about particular items. Typical information concerns the personal
data which help to define user groups and their interests: (virtual) museums, cate‐
gories of exhibits, artists and their epochs, user comments concerning the museum
and exposition design, presentation of the exhibits and complementary information,
quality of digital exhibit and metadata, reports of erroneous or missing information
or technical flaws, system handling and usability, free navigation and guided tours,
facilities to communicate with the curator, technical staff or other visitors, degree
of immersion, modern multi-touch interfaces.

An example how the analysis of user input allows for adapting user interfaces is
shown  in  [18].  Here,  input  is  used  to  identify  input  errors  through  modeled  error
automata. These error automata can also be used to generate reconﬁguration rules for
formal reconﬁguration of a user interface on its logical layer together with reconﬁgu‐
ration  patterns  derived  from  psychological  guidelines.  In  the  context  of  VMs,  this
approach can be used to identify certain visitor interaction patterns to trigger changes
in the interface, the content and the exposition layout. Furthermore, other visitors can
proﬁt from this type of adaption.

In the following list, we summarize the most relevant activities in correlation with
visitors’ input. Most visitors’ contributions concerning modiﬁcations of the exhibit and
exhibition design via interaction are relevant to Sect. 3 much as the spiral model is
applied in software engineering.
• Correcting/enhancing or completing exhibits, metadata or the technical platform.
Visitors are invited to ask questions and to provide information via various commu‐
nication channels like an electronic guestbook or writing an email;

• Identifying areas of interest.

User actions, such as approaching an exhibit, turning objects, and zooming in on
certain features, are recorded and evaluated to inform further enhancement of the
digitized 3D object and facilitate users’ navigation in these areas, to determine user
groups and navigation behavior and to assess important/interesting exhibition areas
or most frequently targeted areas using heat maps that display the results of a cluster
analysis. They are also used to determine which exhibition areas are less frequently
visited and detect design ﬂaws. This information can be used directly to support the
curator in exhibition planning;

• Modifying the exhibit when interaction is provided.

Crowdsourcing and Knowledge Co-creation in Virtual Museums

9

As described in [3], visual objects can be inspected and scrutinized from diﬀerent
vantage points, and the user can modify an object’s position, exposition and appear‐
ance. Geometric objects can be moved or rotated, superposed, scaled or modiﬁed,
cloned, or made invisible. Scene graph–based languages support the deconstruction
of an object into its various parts and, in a diﬀerent way, even its reconstruction from
its parts. Thus, visitors become creators of various new representations of an artwork;

• Creating appropriate context/placing objects in a context.

Visitors navigate within the exposition by moving through diﬀerent viewpoints or
clicking inside an exhibit area, watch metadata activating information frames, look
at collections of similar items, comment on the exhibit in a virtual guestbook, make
annotations, and cite related work;

• Building  their  own  exposition,  publishing  tours  /  storytelling  /  disseminating

information.

As proposed in [19] as a structured task, in order to record a sequence of ideas and adapt
it to the VM context, users can
• objectify: mentally represent ideas as (an existing) pictorial artwork and their context

• organize: (conceive a tour) and order the pictures in the sequence required to produce

• associate and aggregate: distribute parts of the story to separate rooms or a proposed

as a museum;

a story;

tour;

• place or displace: hang or move each item on a wall;
• access and enter: visit the museum (sometime later);
• move: walk through the rooms;
• perceive: see the items hanging on the walls, placed in the room or outside area;
• discover: ﬁnd each item along the way;
• recognize and interpret: remember what each item represents;
• Recommending and voting.
To elaborate valuable recommendations, information about users is needed. This infor‐
mation can be collected before, during or after visits.

To support the visitor or user, the VM or exhibit should be hosted on a versatile
technical platform and displayed via high-performance software tools. Unfortunately,
most web browser plugins that visualize virtual environments do not provide meaningful
server logs or data to reconstruct visitors’ tours and point-and-click navigation. A visitor
moving in a HTML5/X3DOM scenario facilitates logging the position, determining
proximity to an exhibit, orientation and walk direction as well as jumping to another
room via a door connector or a tele-porter to produce a sort of camera replay. Also, the
dwell time in front of the exhibit and clicks to access to metadata and further material
can be recorded. At the entrance, during the visit or before leaving, visitors can provide
information about themselves and their interests, comment or access the exhibit or parts
of it. A statistical evaluation of speciﬁc user group walks makes available transition
matrices, averaged dwell time and engagement. These data can help identify areas of
interest (cf. list of visitors’ contributions above), develop favorite tours, and publish

10

D. Biella et al.

series  of  pictures  together  with  context  and  stories  surrounding  tour  highlights.
However, using a solution with a browser plugin requires additional eﬀort to collect user
input,  record  viewpoints  and  sojourn  time,  measure  engagement  and  support  tour
publishing or storytelling in accordance with DRM.

One interesting question is how museum staﬀ can encourage visitors to participate.
We propose awarding participation by providing users with extra features; these might
include electronic catalogues, opportunities to assess the exhibit or upload additional
material, or ways to publish on the museum platform or recommend their tour. Never‐
theless, which instruments are most suitable has to be further evaluated in one of our
use cases.

For the first use case, which is presented in the next section, we opted for the kiosk
system solution based on the European legislation that allows collection material to be
made digitally available to individual members of the public through a closed network and
within a special exhibition context for the purpose of research or private study [20].

5 Use Cases
5.1 The Virtual Leopold Fleischhacker Museum
The Virtual  Leopold Fleischhacker  Museum consists  primarily  of annotated  photo‐
graphs and reconstructed tombstones. We decided to develop the museum using X3D
and Java/PHP technology and the powerful BS contact X3D plugin to display the virtual
environment  at  http://mw2013.museumsandtheweb.com/paper/the-virtual-leopold-
ﬂeischhacker-museum/ (cf. Fig. 1).

Unfortunately,  current  X3D  plugins  neither  support  a  multiuser  perspective  nor
generate group awareness; however, an individual user may interact with the items and
retrieve further information via an avatar, and Java-capable X3D browsers can be used
in shared workspaces to walk, navigate and work together in complex collective tasks.
It was decided by the curator that no interaction and animation should be included as
stylistic devices in the free walking and guided tours.

Fig. 1. Welcome page of the Leopold Fleischhacker Museum with access to free and guided tours

Therefore, we will also present a digital 2D/3D object browser similar to familiar
examples where visitors have the opportunity to browse and search for 2D/3D exhibit items

Crowdsourcing and Knowledge Co-creation in Virtual Museums

11

and their corresponding metadata as well as rotating, zooming and panning the 3D recon‐
structions or watching predefined animations.(cf. http://examples.x3dom.org/v-must/
ipad_metadata_expert/)

Additional support for annotating objects could be implemented as well to focus on

crowdsource and co-knowledge creation.

Fig. 2. Tombstone in the outside area

An alternative method is to use  WebGL and display X3D ﬁles using X3DOM.
X3DOM is developed and maintained by Fraunhofer IGD and proposes a new HTML
proﬁle that is an extension of X3D’s interchange proﬁle. However, at the start of the
Fleischhacker project, tests showed that this solution performed worse than the one
ultimately selected.

The virtual Fleischhacker museum hosts about 200 pictorial exhibits; 3D assets like
plants, pillars, glass vitrines, benches and information tableaux; and 29 tombstones
reconstructed by the crowd using photographs, Blender and X3D export and carefully
placed outside in a virtual Jewish cemetery (cf. Fig. 2). Several masks (cf. Fig.3) were
reconstructed together with one greatly enlarged seal presented in the entrance hall of
the VM (cf. Fig. 4).

Most  of  this  work  was  provided  by volunteers  and  submitted  online. Among
others, Dr. Michael Brocke, director of the Solomon Ludwig Steinheim Institute for

Fig. 3. 3D reconstruction of a mask by S. Yaslar

12

D. Biella et al.

German-Jewish history in Essen has done significant, extensive research on Leopold
Fleischhacker and allowed the museum to incorporate his archive.

The exhibition design, texts and room arrangements were contributed by the curator,
Dr. Barbara Kaufhold, and thematically arranged in 15 exhibition rooms in a star-shaped
museum and a forest landscape. At the end of this year, the VM and selected tours will
be presented in a traditional museum environment together with a few physical artworks
in several displays.

Fig. 4. Seal and digital 3D reconstruction by S. Yaslar, 3D print out by K.-Michael Köhler
(http://mw2013.museumsandtheweb.com/paper/the-virtual-leopold-ﬂeischhacker-museum/)

It has been proven that the impact of the crowd was signiﬁcant and indispensable.
Volunteers contributed work to the extent of about three man-years in diﬀerent catego‐
ries of tasks:
• Creating  and  enhancing  digital 3D  exhibits  and context,  mostly  tombstones  and
medals, setup of rooms and outdoor areas, physical support for information, naviga‐
tion aid etc.;

• Developing and completing the metadata standard, checking new sorts of metadata

and room and landscape design;

• Deﬁning tours, acting as test persons, and contributing to information material and

catalogues.

5.2 Cooperation with the Museo de Arte Contemporaneo at Santiago de Chile
In January 2010 and September 2014, we digitized nine rooms presenting paintings and
sculptures in permanent and temporary exhibits with the help and support of the Museo
de Arte Contemporaneo (MAC) staﬀ.

The results are partially described in [3], where we developed a new taxonomy of
interactivity types inspired by certain elements of the actual learning object metadata
standard LOM, such as interactivity type, intended end user role and entries measuring
occupation time. Whereas geometric objects can be moved or rotated, superposed, scaled
or modiﬁed, cloned, or made invisible, visual objects were inspected and scrutinized

Crowdsourcing and Knowledge Co-creation in Virtual Museums

13

from  diﬀerent  vantages,  regions  of  interest  annotated,  and  position,  exposition  and
appearance modiﬁed.

Fig. 5. Animated spring experiment

Lingemann  [3]  has  developed  a  framework  that  enables  the  user  to  manipulate
objects described in a scene graph–based language like X3D via input frames and special
dialogues. Conﬁgurations of an animated object and its interactive deconstruction into
its various parts are recorded in X3D, correspond to the given metadata standard and
can be visualized, exported or reconstituted at any time. Furthermore, the deconstruction
of parts of a house consisting of cutouts of two adjacent fronts and a roof is discussed.
Lingemann also implemented a virtual instance of the spring installation created by the
artist Pablo Langlois in 1995 and displayed in the MAC (cf. Fig. 5).

The virtual exhibit is constructed using ﬁve textured black cylinders showing human
faces. At the lower end, identical springs are attached to small picture frames. The
springs can be extended and animated by the visitor.

These examples show the feasibility of collecting visitors’ modiﬁed artwork and
user-generated animations that can be recorded and published. During the work on this
use case, it was mostly volunteers who contributed to the development of a VM perform‐
ance standard and to the interaction design, including implementation of prototypical
realizations, such as exposition and room editors and mobile capture tools for the digi‐
tization of exposition rooms.

5.3 Crowd-Based Support for Shape Restoration
Reconstruction of high-quality 3D shapes is a diﬃcult problem, yet high-quality shapes
are  needed  for  scientiﬁc  exploration  (e.g.,  taking  measurements  of  buildings  and
comparing  details)  or  providing  high-quality  visualization  results.  As  discussed  in
Sect. 3, existing methods of 3D crowd acquisition, like ARC3D or PHOTOSYNTH,
allow  3D  reconstruction  from  crowd-provided  images.  However,  depending  on  the
availability of images, the reconstructions may still be ﬂawed, with incomplete or inac‐
curate geometry. While this might be improved by adding more images of the target
object, the problem becomes even  more severe when the original  artifact has been
chipped, eroded or even destroyed. Recently, a comprehensive workﬂow for the resto‐
ration of chipped, eroded or otherwise damaged 3D objects from the Cultural Heritage

14

D. Biella et al.

domain has been proposed [21]. This workﬂow comprises the following steps: (a) digi‐
tization, (b) reassembly, (c) shape completion, and (d) missing object export.

Fig.  6. Successful  restoration  of  an  incomplete  3D  shape  using  automatic,  symmetry-based
completion (left). Symmetry-based shape completion may fail if the missing section extends
across a candidate symmetry plane (e.g., the tombstone on the right).

Clearly, crowd-sourced approaches can help with (a). Fragment reassembly (b) can
be done automatically if certain assumptions hold, as recent results on real Cultural
Heritage object data show [21]. A problem which typically cannot be solved completely
independently of application domain, or involvement of users, is the completion of
missing sections of 3D shapes (step (c) in the workﬂow). For certain types of shapes,
symmetry-based completion may be possible, and recently, robust symmetry detection
in incomplete and noisy shapes has been supported using interest-point analysis [22]
(see also Fig. 6 left). However, for non-symmetric shapes, and shapes where the missing
elements coincide with candidate symmetry planes, the method will not provide best
results (see Fig. 6, right). Especially in the latter cases, crowd involvement could be
extremely useful in helping restore plausible, high-quality 3D shapes. Speciﬁcally, a
simple Web-based query form can be designed, in which voluntary users can ﬂag auto‐
matically created candidate reconstructions as successful or unsuccessful. In the latter
case, a lightweight 3D interface could be created to allow a user to adjust the symmetry
plane (if it has not been successfully detected) or to complete a missing section manually.

6 Recent Progress and Open Problems in the Field

In recent years, the authors and their collaborators have concentrated their research on
the development of a viable VM standard, ViMCOX, in the context of existing standards
like LIDO, the realization of the multipurpose system ViMEDEAS and smaller editors
to design and generate virtual 3D and 2D museum environments or to publish and
archive virtual exhibition layouts. The software Mobile Object Catcher was created to
support curators and volunteers in digitizing existing museum rooms using a smartphone
and its camera to measure the room photogrammetrically, to reconstruct doors, windows
and walls along with the exhibit and to generate the corresponding ViMCOX metadata
[23]. This also includes various ways to design and realize outdoor areas with typical
landscape characteristics. Furthermore, the authors have developed an application for
use by the 3D museum designer as a management tool for editing 3D objects within a

Crowdsourcing and Knowledge Co-creation in Virtual Museums

15

graphical user interface, including real-time adjustment of their size, location and orien‐
tation as well as the creation of 3D light sources for the scene; this information can be
saved in a standardized document ﬁle format. Allahbakhsh et al. [24] and Wienecke’s
PhD thesis [25] show evidence that a substantial eﬀort remains to be done in automa‐
tizing the process chain to request, collect, assess and integrate crowd contributions to
virtual museums.

Fig. 7. Crowd’s co-curation process chain – important issues

16

D. Biella et al.

Figure 7 summarizes the various tasks and roles within the co-curation process. This
process starts by ﬁrst preparing, then visiting the exhibit and, ﬁnally, identifying already
completed work and important issues yet to be dealt with. The main challenges in this
process include the automatic generation of
• a speciﬁc call deﬁning the task, the qualiﬁcations necessary to address the task, and
the provision of input sheets to collect text, data and metadata along with an object
to be uploaded;

• access  to  special  purpose  digitizing  and  modeling  software  and  communication
facilities (e.g., chats) where questions may be asked or comments  collected and
saved;
On the software engineers’ side, one needs tools to control, correct and integrate the
content created. These tools include the following:

• Special similarity criteria to rate object ﬁdelity and the means to clarify its provenance
• Metadata that meets the standards
• Decision support about the use and integration of crowd contributions

7 Outlook and Current Work

Aspects of the second main focus in our research on crowdsourcing support will be
examined during an exhibition of Fleischhacker’s estate to take place at the Düsseldorf
Memorial to the Victims of Persecution (Mahnund 
Gedenkstätte) from November 2015
to February 2016. On this occasion, we plan to enhance our curator software ViME‐
DEAS [9] to facilitate the collection of crowd and user data and to include communi‐
cation opportunities such as an electronic guest book.

Furthermore, we propose to implement a service-oriented architecture including a
server to host the user proﬁles and WebServices for 3D object, metadata and tour content
creation and storage based on the ViMCOX standard. We also plan to implement an
X3DOM render layer to display VMs on mobile platforms, including a sensor layer to
gather sensor data and update the VM representation. Our X3DOM virtual museum
generator already supports Android-based smartphones and Google’s  DIY low-cost
Cardboard VR glasses, which allow users to visit and explore generated VM environ‐
ments. Further eﬀort is being made to implement a CAVE version that allows multiple
users to become immersed in the virtual environment.

Finally, during the CRIWG 2015 meeting, we plan to launch a new crowdsourcing

VM project devoted to the reconstruction of the Armenian ecclesiastical heritage.

Acknowledgement.  The work of Tobias Schreck was partially supported by EC FP7 STREP
Project PRESIOUS, grant no. 600533 (www.presious.eu). The 3D restoration result of Fig. 6
(right) is courtesy of Dr. Ivan Sipiran, University of Konstanz.

Crowdsourcing and Knowledge Co-creation in Virtual Museums

17

References

1. Biella,  D.:  Replication  of  Classical  Psychological  Experiments  in  Virtual  Environments.

University of Duisburg-Essen, Berlin (2006). Ph.D.-Thesis

2. Biella,  D.,  Luther,  W.:  A  general  framework  for  replicated  experiments  in  virtual  3D
environments.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  4th  International  Conference  on  Web  Information
Systems and Technologies (WEBIST2008), vol. 1, pp. 316–323, INSTICC Press (2008)

3. Biella, D., Luther, W., Baloian, N.: Virtual museum exhibition designer using enhanced
ARCO standard. In: XXIX International Conference of the Chilean Computer Science Society
(SCCC) 2010, 15–19 November, pp. 226–235. IEEE Press (2010)

4. Thuan, N.H., Antunes, P., Johnstone, D.: Factors influencing the decision to crowdsource. In:
Antunes, P., Gerosa, M.A., Sylvester, A., Vassileva, J., de Vreede, G.-J. (eds.) CRIWG 2013.
LNCS, vol. 8224, pp. 110–125. Springer, Heidelberg (2013).http://staff.sim.vuw.ac.nz/pedro-
antunes/wp-content/uploads/criwg-13-cs.pdf

5. Benson,  S.:  Co-creation  101:  How  to  Use  the  Crowd  as  an  Innovation  Partner  to  Add
Value  to  your  Brand.  (Web  log  comment).  VisionCritical,  21  October  2013.  https://
www.visioncritical.com/cocreation-101/

6. Uden, M., Zipf, A.: OpenBuildingModels: towards a platform for crowdsourcing virtual 3D

cities. In: 7th 3D GeoInfo Conference. Quebec City, QC, Canada (2012)

7. Ciolﬁ, L.: The collaborative work of heritage: open challenges for CSCW. In: Bertelsen,
O.,W., Ciolﬁ, L., Grasso, M.A., Papadopoulos, G.A. (eds.) Proceedings of the 13th European
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, pp. 83–101, Springer, London (2013)
8. Zurita, G., Baloian, N.: Mobile, collaborative situated knowledge creation for urban planning.

Sensors 12(5), 6218–6243 (2012)

9. Biella,  D.,  Luther,  W.,  Sacher,  D.:  Schema  migration  into  a  web-based  framework  for
generating virtual museums and laboratories. In: 18th International Conference on Virtual
Systems and Multimedia (VSMM) 2012, pp. 307–314, IEEE Press, Milan (2012)

10. Simon, N.: The Participatory Museum. http://www.participatorymuseum.org/chapter1/
11. Rodriguez Echavarria, K., Theodoridou, M., Georgis Ch., Arnold, D., Doerr, M., Stork, A.,
Peña  Serna,  S.:  Semantically  Rich  3D  Documentation  for  the  Preservation  of  Tangible
Heritage. In: Arnold, D., Kaminski, J., Niccolucci, F., and Stork, A. (Editors): The 13th
International Symposium on Virtual Reality, Archaeology and Cultural Heritage VAST, the
Eurographics Association (2012)

12. Morin, G.: 3D Models for…. Habilitation à Diriger les Recherches in Computer Sciences.

Institut National Polytechnique de Toulouse, Université de Toulouse (2014)

13. Nghiem, T.P.: Enhancing the Use of Online 3D Multimedia Content through the Analysis of

User Interactions. Doctoral Thesis, INP Toulouse (2014)

14. Dallas, C.: The Presence of Visitors in Virtual Museum Exhibitions. Paper Presented to the
Numérisation, Lien Social, Lectures Colloquium, University of Crete, Rethymnon, 3–4 June
2004

15. Carletti,  L.,  McAuley,  D.,  Price,  D.,  Giannachi,  G.,  Benford,  S.:  Digital  humanities
and  crowdsourcing:  an  exploration.  In:  MW2013:  Museums  and  the  Web  2013,  The
Annual Conference of Museums and the Web, April 17–20, 2013, Portland, OR, USA. http://
mw2013.museumsandtheweb.com/paper/digital-humanities-and-crowdsourcing-an-
exploration-4/

16. Sacher, D., Biella, D., Luther, W.: Towards a versatile metadata exchange format for digital

museum collections. In: IEEE Proceedings 2013 Digital Heritage International Congress

17. Straub, J., Kerlin, S.: Development of a large, low-cost, instant 3D scanner. Technologies 2,

76–95 (2014)

18

D. Biella et al.

18. Weyers, B., Luther, W.: Formal modelling and identiﬁcation of operating errors for formal
user  interface  reconﬁguration.  In:  7th  Vienna  International  Conference  on  Mathematical
Modelling (MATHMOD 2012), vol. 7 (1), pp. 487–492, Elsevier (2012)

19. Kuhn, W., Blumenthal, B.: Spatialization: Spatial Metaphors for User Interfaces, Tutorial

CHI 96. http://www.ncgia.buﬀalo.edu/i21/papers/kuhn.html

20. Dierickx, B., Tsolis, D.: Overview of Collective Licensing Models and of DRM Systems
and  Technologies  Used  for  IPR  Protection  and  Management.  eContentplus  (2005).
www.athenaeurope.org/getFile.php?id=665

21. Gregor, R., Sipiran, I., Papaioannou, G., Schreck, T., Andreadis, A., Mavridis, P.: Towards
automated  3D  reconstruction  of  cultural  heritage  objects.  In:  Proceedings  of  the
EUROGRAPHICS Workshop on Graphics and Cultural Heritage, pp. 135–144, Eurographics
Association (2014)

22. Sipiran, I., Gregor, R., Schreck, T.: Approximate symmetry detection in partial 3D meshes.

Comput. Graph. Forum 33(7), 131–140 (2014)

23. Hopmann, D.: Room Measurement Using Photogrammetric Methods and Mobile Phones for
Exhibition Planning and Archiving. Diploma thesis (in German), University of DuisburgEssen 
(2013)

24. Allahbakhsh, M., Benatallah, B., Ignjatovic, A., Motahari-Nezhad, H.R., Bertino, E., Dustdar,
S.: Quality control in crowdsourcing systems: issues and directions. IEEE Internet Comput.
17(2), 76–81 (2013)

25. Wienecke, L.: An Analysis of Productive User Contributions in Digital Media Applications

for Museums and Cultural Heritage. Ph.D. Thesis. Bauhaus-University, Weimar (2010)

