 

Context, Patterns and Geo-collaboration to Support 

Situated Learning  

Gustavo Zurita1 and Nelson Baloian2 

1 Information Systems and Management Department, University de Chile, 

Diagonal Paraguay 257, RM, Santiago de Chile, Chile 

gzurita@fen.uchile.cl 

2 Department of Computer Science, Universidad de Chile, Blanco Encalada 2010, RM, 

Santiago, Chile 

nbaloian@dcc.uchile.cl 

Abstract.  Situated  Learning  stresses  the  importance  of  the  context  in  which 
learning takes place. It has been therefore frequently associated with informal 
learning or learning outside the classroom. Mobile technologies can play an important 
role supporting this type of learning, since it mainly occurs in the field. 
In this paper we present a learning system and a methodology based on the use 
of  patterns.  Students  learn  about  patterns  by  finding  instances  of  them  in  the 
field, or by recognizing new patterns unknown to them so far. The teacher proposes 
tasks to the students consisting of finding instances of patterns or discovering 
new ones along a path or inside a pre defined area on a map. This work 
illustrates the role that geo-referenced data can play in situated learning. 

Keywords: Mobile Learning, Geo-collaboration, Situated Learning. 

1 

Introduction 

Situated  learning  is  a  general  theory  of  knowledge  acquisition  that  emphasizes  the 
importance of the activity, the context and the culture in which learning occurs [13]. 
Social interaction is another critical component of situated learning; learners become 
involved in a "community of practice" which embodies certain beliefs and behaviors to 
be acquired. Educational technologists have been applying the notion of situated learning 
over the last two decades, in particular promoting learning activities that focus on 
problem-solving skills [11, 15, 20]. The notion of “cognitive apprenticeship” [5] is also 
closely related to “situated learning” as: "Cognitive apprenticeship supports learning in 
a domain by enabling students to acquire, develop and use cognitive tools in authentic 
domain activity. Learning, both in and outside school advances through ”.  

Now,  the  integration  of  one-to-one  computer-to-learner  models  of  technology  enhanced 
by wireless mobile computing and position technologies provides new ways to 
integrate indoor and outdoor learning experiences. The notion of “seamless learning” 
[22] has been proposed to define these new learning situations that are marked by a 
continuity of learning experiences across different learning contexts. Students, individually 
 or  in  groups,  carry  out  learning  activities  whenever  they  want  in  a  variety  of 
situations and that they switch from one scenario to another easily and quickly. In these 

J. Bravo, D. López-de-Ipiña, and F. Moya (Eds.): UCAmI 2012, LNCS 7656, pp. 503–511, 2012. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012 

504 

G. Zurita and N. Baloian 

learning situations, learners are able to examine the physical world by capturing sensor 
and geo-positional data and conducting scientific inquiries and analyses in new ways 
that incorporate many of the important characteristics suggested by situated learning. 

In  this paper  we  describe our  current  research  efforts  that  include  the  design of a 
learning  environment  that  integrates  learning  with  patterns,  mobile  applications  and 
geo-collaboration  tools  in  order  to  support  situated  learning.  Learning  activities  in 
these settings take place in and outside the classroom and encourage students to collect 
data in the field in order to find, relate and document patterns of any nature. An important 
element of the collected data is the geographical location where instances of the 
pattern being learned are located. 

2 

Related Work 

Some interesting applications supporting learning activities guided by situated learning 
making use of geo-referenced data over maps and mobile devices have been developed 
in  the  past  years.  Few  of  them  rely  upon  geo-localization features  that  characterized 
Geographic Information Systems (GIS) while most of the applications are based on the 
notion of location-based services (LBS). A relevant difference between LBS and GIS 
is  that  a  GIS  application  also  geo-references  information  using  visually  represented 
maps, in addition to offering localization services as LBS does. A GIS also offers several 
additional functionalities, such as associating information of different nature to a 
geographic location, recording the history of routes, making notes on real geographic 
zones, determining routes, comparing different notes made in different locations, etc. 
These different functionalities and information layers certainly may introduce an added 
value to situated learning applications supported by geo-localization, as they allow to 
make connections between places, content, learning activities and learners.  

Collaborative  activities  can  be  introduced  in  situated  learning  scenarios by  letting 
participants collaboratively geo-reference information, as well as solving tasks in particular 
locations taking advantages of the affordances of mobile technologies. Students 
may collaboratively work at the same time and in the same place, at the same time and 
in different places, at different times in the same place or at different times in different 
places.  These  types  of  collaborative  activities  have  not  been  widely  explored  yet  in 
situated learning settings since most of the research efforts have only focused on one or 
another modality. Moreover, few efforts consider the benefits of other learning modalities 
 like personalized  and  social  learning,  encompassing  physical  and  digital  worlds, 
ubiquitous  knowledge  access,  combining  use  of  multiple  device  types,  knowledge 
synthesis or learning with patterns [22].  

Patterns play a significant role in learning. Research findings in the field of learning 
psychology provide some indications that human learning can be explained by the fact 
that learner discover, register and later apply patterns [7, 10, 17, 18].  These cognitive 
processes "involves actively creating linkages among concepts, skill elements, people, 
and experiences" [7]. For the individual learner, the learning process involves "'making 
meaning' by establishing and re-working patterns, relationships, and connections" [7].  
Patterns are recurring models, often are they presented as solutions for recurring problems.
 Natural sciences, mathematics and arts also work with patterns. The exact use of 
the term however, varies from discipline to discipline. The first formalization of pattern 
 description  and  their  compilation  into  networks  of  “pattern  languages”  was 

 

 

Context, Patterns and Geo-collaboration to Support Situated Learning 

505 

proposed by Alexander et al., [1]. A pattern consists of a set of components including 
the name of the pattern, description of the problem it solves, the solution to this problem,
  an  example  and  the  relations  it  has  to  other  patterns.  This  approach  has  been 
adopted  by  many  disciplines  like  architecture,  software  development  [8],  interaction 
design [3] and pedagogy [19]. Although the evidence that patterns play an important 
role in learning they have seldom been used to support the development of cognitive 
and social skills apart from the field mathematics. 

Lave & Wenger [13] suggest that learning is better of when knowledge is presented 
in an authentic context, i.e., settings and applications that would normally involve that 
knowledge. They also claim that learning requires social interaction and collaboration. 
Brown et al., [5] list a set of procedures that are characteristic to cognitive apprenticeship 
in a situated learning context; starting with a task embedded in a familiar activity 
which shows the students the legitimacy of their implicit knowledge and its availability 
as scaffolding in apparently unfamiliar tasks; allowing students to generate their own 
solution  paths  which  helps  make  them  conscious  creative  members  of  the  problemsolving 
context; and helping students to acquire some of the culture's values. In order 
to operational the ideas guiding situated learning, is necessary to identify its the critical 
aspects in order to enable it to translate into teaching and learning activities that could 
be applied inside and outside the classroom [5]. In response to this challenge, Herrington 
& Oliver [9]  suggest a practical framework for designing situated learning activities 
including the following requirements: C1. Provide authentic contexts reflecting the 
way knowledge is used in real life. C2. Provide authentic activities. C3. Provide access 
to expert performances and the modeling of processes. C4. Provide multiple roles and 
perspectives.  C5.  Support collaborative construction  of  knowledge.  C6. Promote reflection 
 to  enable  abstractions  to  be  formed.  C7.  Promote  articulation  to  enable  tacit 
knowledge to be made explicit. C8. Provide coaching and scaffolding by the teacher at 
critical times. C9. Provide for authentic assessment of learning  within the tasks. Recently,
  a  few  situated  learning  applications  that  rely  on  geo-collaboration  have  been 
tested  and  they  are described below. Table 1 presents  a  selection of related  research 
efforts in this field ranging from 2005 until today, which include the usage of mobile 
devices and geo-localization over maps. 

Moop [14] is a learning environment supported by mobile phones, through which 
learners analyzes their thoughts and make observations. It has been designed for primary 
school children and has the following tools: a control for a camera, a video camera 
and a voice recorder. When a GPS-locator is connected, the location information will 
follow  observations  automatically.  A  location-bound  task  course  is  created  with  the 
help of a GPS-locator and a user can easily proceed on course to reach the set goals. 
Planning the route with the Moop’s map view allows for a variety of learning situations 
and study plans. With the teacher application it is possible to plan the route directly 
live on course in the nature and in the observation place. LOCH [16], describes 
a  computer  supported  ubiquitous  learning  environment  for  language  learning.  It  was 
conceived to assist overseas students to learn Japanese while involved in real life situations.
 Students can make  use  of their PDAs for writing down annotations, recording 
questions, taking pictures and reporting back to the teacher. At anytime, the teacher is 
monitoring  the  position of  the  students  and  can  establish  communication  with  them, 
either  through  instant  messaging  or  IP  phone,  both  preinstalled  on  the  PDA.  In 
AMULETS [11], children use a mobile application with GPS to learn about “tree  

 

506 

G. Zurita and N. Baloian 

Table  1.  Characterization  of  representative  research  projects  using  geo-collaborative  situated 
learning  applications.  C1  to  C9  rows  correspond  to  the  requirements  of  situated  learning 
applications  describe  above.  Ref=reference  -  year,  Plc=place,  Obj=objective,  Trg=  Target 
group, Tec=technology, Clm=collaborative space/time mode, Evt=evaluation. 

Ref 
Plc 

Obj 

Trg 

[15] -2005 
Outside/Inside the 
classroom.  
Learning in a 
mobile scenario by 
sharing observations 

Primary and 
secondary school 
students 

Tec  Mobile phones with 

cameras 

Same time, different 
places between 
students and teacher 
using a voice 
channel 
Observation  
√ 

[17] - 2006 
Outside/Inside the 
classroom.    
To learn Japanese in 
real life situations. 

20 to 30 year old 
users 

PDA with GPS, 
Bluetooth. Wi-Fi , 
and  smart board  

Same time, same 
place and different 
places among users 
and teacher 

Questionnaires 
√ 

[12] - 2007 
Outside/Inside the 
classroom.  
Enhance content of 
the curricula. 
enriching the field 
experience 
4th grade students 
and 5th grade 
students  
Nokia 6630 with 
GPRS connection. 
And HP iPAQ 
6515 with GPS 
Same time, place 
among students, 
different place and 
time between 
students and teacher 
Questionnaires 
√ 

Clm 

Evt 

C1 

C2 

C3 
C4 
C5 
C6 
C7 
C8 
C9 

√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 

√ 

  
  
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 

√ 

  
  
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
 

[22] - 2008 
Outside the 
classroom  
Game learning to 
analyze and learn 
math problems  

12 to 14 year old 
students  

[2] - 2009 
Outside the 
classroom 
Game learning 
through participation 
 and problem 
solving 
Secondary students  sixth graders 

[16] - 2010 
Outside the 
classroom 
Easily record and  
sharing of knowledge 
using maps, 
sketches 

students 

Mobile phone with 
a GPS receiver 

Laptops with GPS 
receiver and 
Google maps  

Tablet PC, a USB 
camera and GPS 
receiver 

[7] - 2011 
Outside the 
Classroom 
To learn Mandarin 
in real situations 

23 to 42 years old 
users 

Iphone with GPS 

Same time, same 
place 

Observation 

 
√ 
 
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
  
 

Same time, same 
place and different 
places among 
students 

Simple testing. 
√ 

√ 

  
  
√ 
 
√ 
  
 

Not specified  

Students interact 
and share with 
different roles. 
Same time, same 
place 
Usability and utility   Questionnaires 
√ 

√ 

√ 

 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
  
 

√ 

 
 
 
√ 
√ 
 
 

 
morphology” and “the history of the city square through centuries”. The system challenges 
the students 
to identify different types of objects and conducting some tasks 
including recording still images and video describing how they solved the tasks they 
were  assigned. In order  to  solve  these problems,  students are required  to  collaborate 
using  a  number  of  tools  including  instant  text  messaging  between  smartphones  and 
computers. MobileMath [21] is designed to investigate how a modern, social type of 
game can contribute to students’ engagement in learning mathematics. It is played on a 
mobile  phone  with  a  GPS  receiver.  Teams  compete  on  the  playing  field  by  gaining 
points  by  covering  as  much  area  as  possible.  They  do  this  by  constructing  squares, 
rectangles  or  parallelograms  by  physically  walking  to  and  clicking  on  each  vertex 
(point). During the game, in real-time the locations of all teams and all finished quadrilaterals 
are visible on each mobile phone. The treasure hunt game [2] has been developed 
as a case study to help analyzing a specific domain and designing a generic 
and flexible platform to support situated collaborative learning. Students go around the 
city and learn how to participate in several social/group activities. In SketchMap [15], 
children carry a PDA and create a map using a stylus pen by drawing streets and placing 
icons such as hospitals or municipal offices. Using a USB camera attached to the 
tablet PC children can capture an image, or a video which is shown as an icon. The 
icon  can  be  dragged  from  the  palette  to anywhere  on  the map. The  system  supports 
reflection by allowing the children to replay their map creation processes. Annotations 
on the maps allow children to add new information or experiences, related to what they 
have  discovered  after  their  outdoor  activities.  The  children  can  collaboratively  share 

 

 

Context, Patte

erns and Geo-collaboration to Support Situated Learning 

507 

  In 
heir 
lanyou 


information and knowledge
Micromandarin [6], a data
context  of  use  was  created
guage based on where you 
are; browsing all language y
Based on the information
ments  stated  by  [9],  the  le
mances and the modeling of
er at critical times (C8), and
Moreover, none of the appl
patterns” modality so far. 

e about neighboring areas in the vicinity of their school.
abase of English-Chinese translations associated with th
d.  This  application  supports  a  key  functions:  studying  l
are; using language you have learned based on where 
you have seen through the application.  
n shown in table 1, we can conclude that from the requ
ess  frequently  considered  are:  the  access  to  expert  per
f processes (C3), the coaching and scaffolding by the tea
d the authentic assessment of learning within the tasks (C
lications described above has introduced the “learning w

uire-
for-
ach-
C9). 
with 

3 

Geo-collaborativ

ve Application for “Learning with Patterns”
” 

Based on the results describe
collaboration  can  be  success
tuated learning. We have de
learning activities that includ
viously  known patterns,  for 
found in the city, or discover
studying  the  reasons  of  why
According to the specific sce
nalities for a system supporti
Creating Patterns: To crea
elements:  name,  descriptio
annotated  over  the  map  by
objects (pictures, videos, et

ed in the previous section, we can conclude that mobile g
sfully  used  to  implement  learning  activities  grounded  on
eveloped a prototype of a system to support geo-collabora
de collecting data on the field in order to find evidence of p
example,  knowing  the patterns of  neo-classical  architect
ring patterns starting from the evidence found in the field (
y  certain  patterns  of  trees  appear  more  often  in  city  par
enario described in the next paragraphs, the following func
ing them have been identified: 
ate a pattern means to define its components, describing
on,  context,  etc.  For  each  pattern,  these  components 
y  free-hand  writing  (see  Figure  1).  Additional  multime
c.) can be associated to the description of the pattern.  

geon 
 siative 

preture 

(e.g. 
rks). 
ctiog 
its 
are 
edia 

Fig. 1. Teacher’s view of the s
system. Left: pattern creation of a “Palma Chilena” with a pic
e exact locations where they are found. Right: pattern creatio
of it, that is geolocalized in th
a “Jacaranda”, whose picture i
illustrates an example, and also the region where they are fou
. 
which is indicated on the map.

 
cture 
n of 
und, 

Creating Tasks: Teachers 
the  students.  They  may  inc

 can create tasks consisting of instructions to be given
clude  the  description  of  activities  and  their  correspond

n  to 
dent 

 

508 

G. Zurita and N. Bal

oian 

instructions annotated over
domly explore a pre-define
(right Figure 1), or visiting
the teacher can define a pat
of it onto the map. Consequ
geographic area by followin
visiting  marked  locations, 
Furthermore, the teacher ca
new ones inside the task cre
and their associations of the

r the map with a specific path (left of Figure 2), or to r
ed area within the city in order to find evidence of patte
g specifically marked places (right of Figure 2). Therefo
th, an area, or mark points by free hand sketching the lim
uently, the task for the students will consist of explorin
ng a path, randomly visiting a concrete area, or specifica
in  order  to  collect  data  about  the  instances  of  a  patte
an associate previously defined patterns to the task or cre
eation process. Figure 2 shows the creation of various ta
ese to the corresponding pattern(s).  

ranerns 

ore, 
mits 
ng a 
ally 
ern. 
eate 
asks 

Fig. 2. Teacher’s view of the 
path (left), and marking specifi

system for the task definitions, which are made by followin

 
ng a 

fic locations (right) in which the students need to work with 

The  teacher  can  create  t
sented to the students befo
touch sensitive computer to

these  patterns  and  tasks  during  the  class,  as  they  are  p
ore using an electronic board or projecting the screen o
o the whole class.  

preof 
a 

Assigning Tasks to Studen
students turn on their mobil
The teacher’s application au
them on the screen as an ico
task icon, the task propositio
Instantiating Patterns: Ac
tain path, explore an area o
boratively create instantiati
they  think  correspond  to  th
text descriptions, pictures o
the pattern definition, see F

Monitoring  Students’  W
where  Internet  is  available
dent’s application sends the
information  is taken by the
tion on the map. It is also 
via chat to give more instru

nts: In the classroom, and before going to the field activ
le devices (Tablets or Tablets-PCs) running the applicati
utomatically discovers the students’ application and displ
on. By just dragging and dropping the student’s icon over
on is transmitted to the student’s device and shown.  

vity, 
tion. 
lays 
r the 

ccording to the proposed task, students may follow a c
of the city, or go to specific places gathering data to co
ions of the pattern  when they  find a certain elements t
he  pattern  giving  by  the  teacher.  Instantiations  consist
or sketches of a certain object found which complies w
Figure 3.  
ork:  Teachers  can  monitor  the  students’  work  in  ar
e  and  a  client-server  communication  is  possible.  The 
e current position at regular time intervals to a server. T
e teacher’s application,  which displays the  student’s po
possible for the teacher to communicate with the stude
uctions about the task in “real time”. 

cer-
ollathat 

t  of 
with 

reas 
stuThis 

osients 


 

 

Context, Patte

erns and Geo-collaboration to Support Situated Learning 

509 

Fig. 3. Two students’ views, w
Each of the three tasks shown
task is highlighted on the left a
opment already done collabora

with instances of the patterns and tasks provided by their teac
n in both interfaces, belong to the same team. The third assig
and the right shows the first. Both interfaces show the task de
atively. 

 
cher. 
gned 
evelTable 
2. The 

requirements and the system features fulfilling it  

earched for in the very place they appear naturally
es in natural environments is a typical work experts often do. 
he teacher and the student. In certain cases students might al
e role of the teacher
ieldwork, back in the classroom the teacher provides exampl
ding the task. 
ratively  on  the  field  in  order  to  collect  the  relevant  data  a

and 

lso 

les 

C5 

Patterns instances are se
C1 
Finding pattern instance
C2 
There are two roles: th
C3 
propose tasks taking the
C4  After completing the fi
from the expert’s regard
Students  work  collabo
share it 
Students present their f
found 
The system allows stud
their unsorted ideas abo
The teacher can help stu
room 
Possible  patterns  and  p
during the work 

C6 

C7 

C8 

C9 

findings in front of the class reflecting about the patterns th

hey 

dents to collect data, relate and communicate them formalizi
out what they found.
udents during the work on the field, as well as back in the clas

ssing 


patterns  instances  are  checked  by  the  students  and  the  teach

her 

4 

Conclusions 

In  our  current  work  In  our
activities that incorporate e
of geo-collaboration tools 
patterns. From our literatur
ties  using  mobile 
techn
implemented and on the ot
important  role  in  the  learn
previous section can be use
in  a  variety  of  learning  sc
designing learning environm
analyze how the proposed s
solution  supports  all  requir
others. An important chara

r  current  efforts,  we  are  proposing  the  design  of  learn
elements of situated learning that are supported by the 
and  mobile applications  which  incorporates learning  w
re review, we can see on the one hand that learning act
nologies  and  geo-collaboration  have  been  success
ther hand, it has been recognized that patterns can play
ning  process.    Since  the  proposed  system  presented  in 
ed to handle patterns in any field/discipline, it can be u
cenarios.  In  section  4,  we  presented  the  requirements 
ments that support situated learning. In this section, we w
system fulfills them. Table 3 illustrates how our sugges
rements  for  situated  learning,  some  in  a  better  way  t
acteristic of the learning approach proposed in our curr

ning 
use 
with 
tivisful 
 
y an 
the 
used 
for 
will 
sted 
than 
rent 

 

510 

G. Zurita and N. Baloian 

efforts is that it starts in the classroom, continues on the field; proceeds then at home 
or in a computer lab and ends with a learning session inside the classroom again. This 
again  can  create  another  cycle  which  is  interesting  from  the  point  of  view  that  the 
sake  system  is  able  to  support  different  learning  modes  and  stages,  without  disruptions 
of methodology, interaction paradigm or data compatibility. In fact, the system 
is able to run on different platforms. It has been used on PCs inside the classrooms, 
where  the  teacher  used  an  electronic  board  to  create  patterns  and  tasks  during  the 
class.  It  has  been  also  used  on  tablet  PCs  as  well  as  on  handheld  computers.  The 
common aspect on all these platforms is the touch screen and the big difference is the 
size.  However,  the  way  of  using  sketching  and  gestures  to  control  the  applications 
was  positively  evaluated  by  the  early  users.  They  also  positively  evaluated  the  fact 
that they use the same interaction paradigm regardless the platform they were using, 
so they do not need to learn how to interact with another application interface. 

Although the first trial of the system has been done implementing a rather simple 
learning activity, it is easy to see that this approach can be used to learn and discover 
more complicated patterns across different fields. Below we provide some examples 
of different field in which we plan to conduct some future trials in order to validate 
our  approach:  a)  Geology  students  must  perform  collaborative  activities  like  field 
measurements and observations that can be  monitored and controlled remotely by a 
teacher. Students must geo-reference their notes, take pictures and make recordings at 
concrete points that will be constructed jointly and/ or with their peers; b) Architecture 
students may recognize construction styles and design patterns in specific areas 
of  an  urban  space.  Students  may  also  collaboratively  survey  construction  styles  or 
design patterns in a certain zone using geo-referenced notes to understand the changes 
in  the  construction  development;  c)  Social  sciences.  Students  of  anthropology,  psychology 
 or  sociology  may  conduct  field  observations  for  which  collaboratively 
created  data  and  information  notes  of  diverse  nature  (text,  images,  video  &  sound), 
associated with its localization will enrich their observations. 

Acknowledgments.  This  paper  was  partially  funded  by  the  “U-APOYA  Program, 
VID 2011” of the Universidad de Chile, and Fondecyt 1085010. 

References 

[1]  Alexander,  C.,  Ishikawa,  S.,  Silverstein,  M.:  A  Pattern  Language.  Towns,  Buildings, 

Construction. Oxford, New York (1977) 

[2]  Bahadur, S., Braek, R.: Platform support for situated collaborative learning. In: International 
Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning, pp. 53–60 (2009) 

[3]  Borchers,  J.:  A  pattern  approach  to  interaction  design.  John  Wiley  &  Sons,  Chichester 

(2001) 

[4]  Breuer, H., Zurita, G., Baloian, N., Matsumoto, M.: Mobile Learning with Patterns. In: 
Procs. of the 8th IEEE Intl. Conf. on Advanced Learning Technologies Santander, Spain, 
July 1-5 (2008) 

[5]  Brown,  J.S.,  Collins,  A.,  Duguid,  P.:  Situated  Cognition  and  the  Culture  of  Learning,  

pp. 32–42 (1989) 

[6]  Edge, D., Searle, E., Chiu, K., Zhao, J., Landay, J.A.: MicroMandarin: mobile language 

learning in context. ACM (2011) 

 

 

Context, Patterns and Geo-collaboration to Support Situated Learning 

511 

[7]  Ewell, P.: Organizing for learning: A point of entry. Draft prepared for discussion at the 
AAHE Summer  Academy at Snowbird. National Center for Higher Education Management 
Systems (NCHEMS) (1997),  
http://www.intime.uni.edu/model/learn-ing/learn_summary.html 
[8]  Gamma, E., Helm, R., Johnson, R., Vlissides, J.: Design Patterns. Elements of Reusable 

Object-Oriented Software. Addison-Wesley, Reading (1995) 

[9]  Herrington, J., Oliver, R.: An instructional design framework for authentic learning environments,
 pp. 23–48 (2000) 

[10]  Howard, J., Mutter, S., Howard, D.: Serial pattern learning by event observation. Journal 
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 18(5), 1029–1039 (1992) 
[11]  Kurti, A., Spikol, D., Milrad, M., Svensson, M., Pettersson, O.: Exploring How Pervasive 
Computing Can Support Situated Learning. In: Proc. of Pervasive Learning Workshop at 
Pervasive, pp. 19–26 (2007) 

[12]  Lave, J.,  Wenger, E.: Situated Learning: Legitimate Periperal Participation. C.U. Press, 

Cambridge (1990) 

[13]  Mattila, P., Fordell, T.: MOOP - Using m-Learning Environment in Primary Schools. In: 

Proceedings of mLearn 2005 (2005) 

[14]  Miura,  S.,  Ravasio,  P.,  Sugimoto,  M.:  Situated  Learning  with  SketchMap.  Interaction 
Technology  Laboratory,  Department  of  Frontier  Informatics.  The  University  of  Tokyo, 
Tokyo (2010) 

[15]  Ogata, H., Yin, C., Paredes, J.R.G., Saito, N.A., Yano, Y., Oishi, Y., Ueda, T.: Supporting 
Mobile Language Learning outside Classrooms. In: The Proceedings of IEEE International 
Con-ference on Advanced Learning Technologies, ICALT 2006, Kerkrade, Netherlands,
 pp. 928–932 (2006) 

[16]  Posner, M., Keele, S.: On the genesis of abstract ideas. Journal of Experimental Psychology 
77(3), 353–363 (1968) 

[17]  Restle, F.: Theory of serial pattern learning: Structural trees. Psychological Reiew 77(6), 

481–495 (1970) 

[18]  The Pedagogical Pattern Project, http://www.pedagogicalpatterns.org (last 

visited on November 5, 2009) 

[19]  Vanderbilt,  C.T.G.:  Anchored  instruction  and  situated  cognition  revisited.  Educational 

Technology 33, 52–70 (1993) 

[20]  Wijers, M., Jonker, V., Kerstens, K.: MobileMath: the Phone, the  Game and the Math. 
Paper presented at the 2nd European Conference on Games Based Learning. Barcelona, 
Spain (2008),  
http://www.fi.uu.nl/isdde/documents/curriculum_jonker.pdf 

[21]  Wong,  L.H.,  Looi,  C.K.:  What  Seams  Do  We  Remove  in  Mobile  Assisted  Seamless 
Learning? A Critical Review of the Literature. Computers & Education 57(4), 2364–2381 
(2011) 

 
 

 

