Sketchpad: A Learning Tool Supporting Creativity

in Collaborative Learning Activities

Gustavo Zurita1, Catalina Cárdenas1, and Nelson Baloian2(✉)

1 Management Control and Information Systems Department,
Faculty of Economics and Business, Universidad de Chile,

Diagonal Paraguay 257, Santiago, Chile

2 Department of Computer Sciences, Universidad de Chile, Beauchef 851, Santiago, Chile

{gzurita,ccardenasb}@fen.uchile.cl

nbaloian@dcc.uchile.cl

Abstract.  There is consensus among curriculum developers of Business Schools
around the world that along with technical knowledge students should be trained
to  also  acquire  soft  skills.  Communication,  collaboration,  creativity,  critical
thinking and problem solving are mentioned by some authors as the most impor‐
tant for professionals of the 21st century to be successful. In order to develop these
skills learners have to perform learning activities where they need to apply them.
In the literature  we found many works about  learning activities  designed for
training creativity which have been used in Business Schools. They do not make
use of technology. On the other hand, there are many works about learning activ‐
ities which make use of technology to train collaboration and problem solving
skills. In this work we present a learning activity which makes use of a technologic
tool  for  supporting  it,  which  promotes  collaboration,  creativity  and  critical
thinking.  A  ﬁrst  experiment  shows  that  the  perception  students  get  from  the
activity and the ability of the tool for supporting these factors is positive.

Keywords: Creativity  ·  Collaboration  ·  Business  schools  ·  Mobile  devices  ·
Brainsketching

1

Introduction

In today’s globalized world, there is an increasing need that professionals develop not
only technical competences but also the so called “soft skills” in order to perform their
activities in an eﬀective and eﬃcient way. This is especially true for professionals of
the business and economics sphere, who need to perform tasks in a high competitive,
changing and demanding environment, in order to adapt themselves to the constant
changes  and  generate  strategies  which  convey  added  value  to  the  diverse  business
processes. In order to achieve this goal it is necessary to include pedagogical activities,
methods and tools in their university curricula.

Griﬃn et al. [1] presented the KSAVE (Knowledge, Skills, Attitudes, Values, Ethics)
model which deﬁnes ten key competences professionals of the 21st century should have

© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
N. Baloian et al. (Eds.): CRIWG 2015, LNCS 9334, pp. 198–209, 2015.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-22747-4_16

Sketchpad: A Learning Tool Supporting Creativity

199

in order to be successful. The KSAVE model categorizes creativity as part of the Ways
of  thinking  competences, along  with  others,  like  critical  thinking,  problem  solving,
decision making, learn to learn, and meta-cognition. The operational deﬁnition of crea‐
tivity provided by the KSAVE model includes knowledge, skills, and attitudes related
to thinking and working creatively, individually and collaboratively. In the same way,
KSAVE highlights the relevance of collaboration and communication skills, which are
classiﬁed as Ways of Working skills.

According  to  Schlee  &  Harich  [2]  and  Fekula  [3],  creativity  and  the  ability  of
working in teams are the most relevant and required skills in professionals of the business
area in order to be successful. Moreover, the AACSB (Association to Advance Colle‐
giate Schools of Business) highlighted the importance of considering various compe‐
tences, among these creativity and the ability of working in teams, when designing
curricula for business schools students [4] which is in line with the KSAVE model. In
2015, the AACB held various seminaries on Curriculum Development Series. One of
them was called Teaching Design for Creativity and Innovation [5], which again high‐
lights the importance of creativity as the way to cope with the requirements of the modern
business environment. The Harvard Business Review also shows the importance of
creativity by publishing many articles on that subject [6].

The literature reports about many works on how to support the development of crea‐
tivity in university students, presenting learning activities introduced in courses in busi‐
ness schools. However, we have not found pedagogical practices supported by recent
technologies  among  them.  On  the  other  hand  there  are  some  works  reporting  on
successful pedagogical activities supported by technology in order to promote creativity
but applied to other learning scenarios. Thus we want to take these works as example,
adapt and extend them, in order to be used for the business school curricula.

This work presents a pedagogical activity designed to help the development and
application of skills and attitudes related to collaborative work and creativity in pregraduate 
students of a business school. The activity, which is performed inside the
classroom, is supported by a collaborative application called Sketchpad, which runs on
tablets wirelessly interconnected among them. Sketchpad was designed based on the
principles  of  collaboration  and  externalization  using  brainsketching,  promoting  the
development and practice of creativity according to previous research works on this
subject reported by the literature. Compared with previous works, the contribution of
Sketchpad is that it promotes considering various points of views when students work
on a creative task. This is done by incorporating rotation among the members of various
groups working on the same task. Sketchpad was tested in a real classroom in order to
formally evaluate its contribution to creativity.

Based on the ideas described above, this research work has been guided by the
following  questions:  (1)  According  to  the  students’  perception,  to  what  extend  the
provided tool (Sketchpad) contributes to the development of creativity?; (2) which is
the perception the students get about the contribution of Sketchpad to promote collab‐
oration; and (3) is there a diﬀerence in this perception when students work in groups
where members have to rotate among the various groups and when they do not?

The results obtained show that Sketchpad enhances creativity in teams working with
rotation compared to those working without rotation. There was also positive evidence

200

G. Zurita et al.

on the perception students had about the ability of Sketchpad supporting collaboration
and externalization.

2 Supporting Creativity Development

The complexity about teaching students to be creative lies in the fact that we cannot
teach that skill but to foster its development through educational activities that include
speciﬁc design principles, pedagogical practices that generated positive previous expe‐
riences based on theories explaining how to generate creativity [7].

The  design  principles  of  the  pedagogical  activity,  and  consequently  of  the  tool
supporting it, presented in this work is based on a pedagogical frame that incorporates
mainly two elements: collaboration and externalization. Regarding collaboration, Fisher
[8] proposes that creativity emerges from the interactions between individuals and the
world,  and  between  the  individual  and  others;  in  the  same  way,  Csikszentmihalyi
emphasizes human interaction as  the place where creativity  emerges [9].  Egeström
adopts a similar approach when proposing that creativity lies in interactions between
persons’ thoughts and their socio cultural context, [8, 10]. Sawyer [11] proposes that
creativity breakthroughs occur during the dialog among persons when they answer to
each other; this contrasts with the myth of individual inspiration, which represents the
idea that creative inspiration comes from the individual. Similarly, Wegerif and others
[11, 12], identify that the base of creativity lies in the tension between diﬀerent perspec‐
tives. Therefore, interactions among people having diﬀerent point of views, which are
in opposition (tension), can be the base for a suitable activity where creative ideas may
arise. From the importance of collaboration we can derive the convenience of designing
activities that include intensive and varied interaction with other persons, allowing the
sharing and discussion of ideas, and observing new points of views.

The second element of creativity we consider, externalization, refers to “taking out
of her/himself” the ideas and thoughts in order to translate them in concrete artifacts
which represents them, in order to make them accessible for working and reﬂect about
them [13]. This attribute of externalization is based on what Schön calls the “back-
talk”. The meaning is that the process of externalizing ideas can unveil questions about
them which were initially ignored, facilitate the emergence of new perspectives, show
new possibilities or obstacles, as well as new relationships to other ideas [14]. Sketching,
drawing and diagramming are good examples of externalization processes, which can
facilitate creative work and foster the development of this competence. From the advan‐
tages  of  externalization  we  can  derive  the  usefulness  of  designing  activities  which
include the elaboration of sketches or other forms of graphic expression. [15, 16].

2.1 Pedagogical Practices and Technological Tools Supporting Creativity
The literature reports on a number of pedagogical practices that make no use of tech‐
nology which are aimed at fostering expressiveness and externalization in order to
stimulate creativity. Some of them make use of diverse methods which combine the
collaborative exchange of ideas [17] based on drawing and sketching [18–20].

Sketchpad: A Learning Tool Supporting Creativity

201

The most simple case is the brainsketching [21] technique, in which students ﬁrst
draw their ideas individually and then exchange them, so that other participant can
complement or modify them, either silently or explaining them at the moment they pass
them to other participants [22]. C-sketch was conceived to foster collaboration in indus‐
trial design. Five persons work individually on a problem simultaneously proposing a
solution by drawing a sketch. After this, they pass their sketches to the following person
who complements, modiﬁes or deletes parts of the original design. Sketches are passed
among the members of the group until each participant has worked on each proposal
once, thus incorporating the aspect of rotation of the ideas to implement collaborative
work [23].

There is positive evidence about the use of technology for supporting brainstorming
processes using sketches and drawings, although not precisely focused on creativity
support:  Inkboard  [24],  Collboard  [25],  Magic  Paper  [24],  y  Co-lab  [26]  are  some
examples.

Inkboard, was designed to be used along with videoconferencing, where participants
synchronously can draw sketches over a shared workspace (a virtual board) [24]. Coll‐
board, incorporates collaborative elements and freehand sketches using digital pens and
interactive boards with private and public spaces; sketches ﬁrst drawn on private work‐
spaces can be then shared in public ones in order to continue working collaboratively
[25]. Magic paper was developed by the MIT and allows teacher and students to draw
physical model on a virtual board working collaboratively [24].

All mentioned applications use technology to support creativity. A common aspect
to all of them is that participants ﬁrst develop ideas individually and then share them,
in order to converge to a single idea collaboratively; therefore we incorporate this aspect
in the design of Sketchpad. Another common aspect to all mentioned applications is that
working groups remain static from the beginning to the end of the activity.

Regarding pedagogical practices in business schools’ curricula for developing crea‐
tivity skills in students, the literature reports some research works made on pedagogical
methodologies introduced in the curses of their curricula. For example in the year 2007,
the Creative Marketing Breakthrough (CMB) presents a reference frame for the devel‐
opment of creativity in lectures through speciﬁc activities related to Marketing [27].
The CMB model deﬁnes creativity as the process through which disruptive ideas are
generated, and considers ﬁve theoretical concepts as its key elements: (1) task motiva‐
tion, (2) cognitive ﬂexibility, (3) disciplinary knowledge, (4) serendipity and (5) uncer‐
tainty [27]. In the year 2008, Aylesworth [28] propose to develop creativity in the
business classroom through the improve-mindset based on the use of techniques of
theater improvisation applied to discussion of case analysis. For this, students must
follow ﬁve steps of theater improvisation: (1) “Yes, and…” they have to accept what
their classmates say and add something to it. They cannot deny or reject what others
previously  said.  (2)  “Deny,  order,  repeat  and  question”,  none  of  these  actions  is
permitted. (3) “Driving  in  the rearview  mirror”, they have to build on the context
proposed at the beginning. (4) “Take Care of yourself … by Taking Care of Everyone
Else”, collaboration instead of competition is promoted. (5) “Mistakes are good oﬀers
in disguise”, there are no mistakes during the discussion since all ideas can lead to new
perspectives and better understanding of the case. [28]. The improve-mindset is meant

202

G. Zurita et al.

to generate a collaborative and highly participative atmosphere in the classroom, which
leads to spontaneity and creativity [28].

We think it is worthwhile to explore which is the role technology can play for devel‐
oping creativity in students of a business school, like for example, using tablets for
supporting externalization through brainsketching.

2.2 Evaluating the Creativity Factor in Technological Tools
Carroll et al. [29] proposed a questionnaire called Creativity Support Index (CSI), which
evaluates the contribution of a technological tool to creativity. CSI identiﬁes six factors
which are considered relevant when designing such a tool: (1) exploration of the various
ideas, concepts or proposals; (2) collaboration among participants; (3) engagement with
the activity being performed; (4) the eﬀort/reward of the task must be adequate; (5) tool
transparency, which means the tool be a mean and not the center of the task; (6) expres‐
siveness, (or externalization) of ideas must be supported by the tool [29].

The collaboration and externalization factors identiﬁed by [29], are relevant aspects
for  designing  a  computational  tool.  Additionally  exploration  and  tool  transparency
should also be considered. In our opinion engagement and eﬀort/reward result from the
perception the user has from the tool.

3 Sketchpad Design

Sketchpad is a collaborative tool running on tablets (specifically iPads) designed to
support pedagogical activities which are aimed at developing creativity in under‐
graduate students of the fourth year in the Business School of the Universidad de
Chile. It has been implemented using HTML5 and the Coupled Object technology
(described in [30, 31]) so it can be run using web browsers Chrome, Mozilla, or
Safari regardless from the operative system of the computational device. Its main
interface, shown in Fig. 1, consists of a workspace, which can be private or shared,
where the user create sketches by freehand drawing and text typewriting, including
basic  edition  functionalities  like  deleting,  copy  and  paste,  undo,  redo,  changing
colors, zooming in and out, etc.

Students can make their contributions through brainsketching to several individual
and/or shared pages but they can work on one only at a time. Icons with a small view
of the page content are shown at the right hand side of the interface, separated in a private
(“Personal”) and a public (“Grupal”). The page that is currently edited is highlighted
with a blue frame (see Fig. 1). In order to share a private page the user has simply to
drag and drop its icon from the private to the public area. A copy of the page will appear
in the public area, keeping the original in the private one. After this, all users participating
in the session will see this page as a new icon in the public area. They can start working
collaboratively by selecting it, clicking on the icon. Figure 1 shows that the user has
created two private pages; one of them has been copied to shared area and has received
another icon of someone else who shared a page. The second public page highlighted
with a blue frame indicating that the user is currently working on it, thus it is shown in

Sketchpad: A Learning Tool Supporting Creativity

203

Fig. 1. Main interface of Sketchpad showing in the main workspace a proposal for the design of
“technological bus stop”; that is being edited collaboratively. The selected page (highlighted with
a blue frame) is in the public (“Groupal”) area (color ﬁgure online).

the main workspace at the center of the interface. By sketching, students can externalize
ideas and proposals, thus promoting creativity [13, 15, 16]. Bruner [13] and Schön [14]
mention the advantages of translating ideas into sketches in order to gain new points of
views.

Collaborative  work using Sketchpad  promotes  creativity according  to what  was
stated by Fisher, Csikszentmihalyi, Egeström [8] and Sawyer [11], who says that the
base for creativity lies in the interaction with others. The easy way that students can
access the working pages in the collaborative area contributes to the tool transparency,
(see Sect. 2.2). Since Sketchpad can be used on tablets it is easy to perform rotations of
students among the groups. We think the more students can contribute to one idea or
proposal, the better will be the exploration factor described in Sect. 2.2, since various
points of views can defy the thinking and knowledge structures previously built.

4 Evaluation Methodology

Sketchpad was preliminary evaluated in an exploratory way, through an experiment
which consisted of a pedagogical activity in which students had to work in teams each
one with three members. Students had to rotate, that means, go from one group to
another, in order to work with other teams.

The activity consisted of students proposing ideas through sketches and texts about
how to implement technological bus stops that could help solve diverse problems related
to the waiting time. First, students had to work individually and then they had to share
their ideas with the members of the group and reach consensus on a single proposal for

204

G. Zurita et al.

Fig. 2. Descriptive schema of the collaborative activity during rotations of members among
groups. The four statuses show the composition of the groups after the rotations indicated by the
arrows.

each group. Once the groups have reached consensus they had to rotate in the following
way: two members of each group (previously deﬁned) had to leave the group and join
the next one, in order to analyze and discuss the idea previously proposed by the group
they join. After a while, they rotate to the next group where they see the solution of the
new group they join. This rotation is performed until the students reach their original
group, where they prepare the ﬁnal proposal for this group. Figure 2 shows schematically
how rotations were performed. There were three working groups G1, G2 and G3, each
one with three students. The ﬁrst sketch (upper right) shows status 1, where participants
are in the original arrangement. The second sketch (upper right, status 2) shows the
groups after two of them have moved to the next group. The third sketch (bottom right,
status 3) shows the groups after the second rotation. The fourth sketch (bottom left, status
4) shows the group after the ﬁnal rotation where students return to their original groups.
It is important to highlight that sketches do not rotate, but only the students. So when
students arrive to a new group they have to join the new group by joining the public
session in which the sketch corresponding to that group is being worked out. After all
rotations are performed, students have seen all the ideas proposed by all groups when
they reach their original one. They had also the opportunity to contribute to them. This
activity shares some similarities with brainsketching, Gallery method and C-sketch,
because it involves sketching and the possibility of having various perspectives on them.
The main diﬀerence lies in the interaction with other group members before producing
the ﬁnal proposal of the group.

In order to have a control group against which we can compare results, the course

was divided in two groups, one working with rotation and the other without.

Sketchpad: A Learning Tool Supporting Creativity

205

The universe of students for the experiment consisted of fourth year students of the
Faculty of economics and Business of the Universidad de Chile studying during the
second semester of 2014. The sample consisted of students enrolled in the Informatics
Technology course. Therefore the sample was not probabilistic and was deﬁned by
convenience, because it was possible to perform the activity without being disruptive to
the course planning. In total, 19 students participated in the experiment, 9 of which
performed the activity with rotation divided in three groups of three students each. The
rest was divided in two groups of three students and one group with four. The groups
were formed randomly. In order to collect information about the experiment we used a
closed questionnaire based on the on the Creativity Factor Evaluation (CSI) proposed
by Carroll et al. [29]. Additionally we used an open questionnaire in order to evaluate
the interaction among participants, and their opinion about the possibility of approaching
the problem from diﬀerent points of views. We also included an external viewer who
registered  aspects  about  collaboration  and  externalization.  The  CSI  questionnaire
consisted of two parts. In the ﬁrst one, students answered questions from the Likert type,
assigning values from “totally disagree” to “totally agree” to ﬁve assertions, each one
expressing positively that the tool was able to support one of the ﬁve factors (collabo‐
ration, exploration and expressiveness (externalization), eﬀort/reward, tool transpar‐
ency, and engagement) according to their opinion. In the second part they were presented
with a list of all possible factor pairs. Since there are ﬁve factors the list consisted of 10
pairs. From each pair they had to select which factor they considered more important
than the other one for performing the activity.

The obtained data were analyzed in two steps. First, the data collected with the
modiﬁed CSI questionnaire were processed according to what the authors propose in
[29] in order to generate values from 0 to 100 for each factor. Second, the data was
processed for obtaining descriptive statistical information using a standard software
application  (SPSS).  On  another  hand,  the  data  obtained  by  the  observations  were
analyzed manually.

The activity was performed during a normal class, which lasted for one hour and

thirty minutes, after which the questionnaires were applied.

5 Results

Results associated to the CSI questionnaire are shown in Table 1. According to them,
Sketchpad favors creativity on a 67,85 level, from 0 to 100. Students who participated
in the activity with rotation evaluated better the support of the technological tool with
a CSI of 75,07, compared with a CSI of 58,96 from the students who participated in the
activity without rotation. However, this diﬀerence is still not statistically signiﬁcant and
cannot be generalized. Now we will analyze the CSI factors applied to Sketchpad, this
is the pair wise comparison of the factors: (a) the collaboration was the factor which
was perceived as the most relevant by the students who worked with rotation as well as
by the students who worked without rotation; (b) exploration and expressiveness (exter‐
nalization) are the factors which come next, and are within the 53,2 % of the total rele‐
vance of the factors, therefore, we can consider that Sketchpad supports the expression

206

G. Zurita et al.

and exploration of the proposed ideas; (c) although eﬀort/reward factor received a good
evaluation (VP = 6,97), it was seldom selected as the most relevant factor for performing
the activity (d) Also the tool transparency was good evaluated but was seldom regarded
as important for the activity; (e) engagement was the factor with the lowest evaluation
and at the same time the less important for performing the activity.

Table 1. Results of the ﬁrst part of the questionnaire

Group without
rotation
ANF VP

Group with
rotation
ANF VP

FACTOR
Collaboration
Exploration
Expressiveness (Externalization)
Eﬀort/reward
Tool transparency
Engagement

Total

ANF VP

6,40
6,68
7,16
6,97
6,21
5,64

5
4
3
2
1
0
Rate:

Rate
5
21,33
4
17,82
3
14,32
1,5
9,29
1
4,14
0,94
0,5
67,85 Rate:

5,32
5,86
6,58
6,58
6,22
5,14

Rate
5
17,73
3
15,63
3
13,16
3
6,58
1
4,15
1,71
0
58,96 Rate:

7,60
7,60
7,80
7,40
6,20
6,20

Rate
25,33
15,20
15,60
14,80
4,13
0,00
75,07

ANF = mean number of times this factor was selected as the more important in the
pair wise comparison; VP = Average score assigned by the students to each factor
computed as (number of times the factor was selected *ANF)/1,5. Rate = the rate of the
factor according to the answers to the Lickert scale evaluation, modiﬁed according to
the CSI to obtain values between 0 and 100.

From the analysis of the answers given to the open answers questionnaire related to
the aspects of interaction among participants, approaching the problem from various
points  of  views  and  having  them  included  in  the  ﬁnal  proposal,  the  possibility  to
approach the solution we can conclude the following remarks: (a) regarding the ability
of the activity and the tool to support interaction among participants, students in general
responded with totally agree, or strongly agree; they said they could discuss with their
classmates various ways to approach the problem and the ideas that were proposed. Only
5 % of the answers were negative. (b) Regarding the ability for approaching the solution
through various points of view the perception of the students was also positive and most
answers were totally agree, strongly agree or agree. Again only 5 % were negative. (c)
Regarding the ability to contribute from various points of view to the ﬁnal result, students
said they could know ideas from other participants and this helped to reﬁne the ﬁnal
proposal. Most answers to this assertion were totally agreed, strongly agree or agree.
Only 7,9 % of the answers were negative.

The analysis of the observation guideline has shown that actively interacted with
their classmates, sharing their ideas and explaining them to the rest. Then students
proceeded to merge the individual proposals. In this way, new solutions emerged from
the elements of the initially proposed ideas and the discussion. In this way we can

Sketchpad: A Learning Tool Supporting Creativity

207

consider that the activity fosters creative products collaboratively. During the discussion
the  individual  ideas  complemented  each  other  and  disagreements  were  part  of  the
merging process. New ideas emerged when individual proposals were challenged trans‐
forming  the  original  ones in new  contributions.  Sketches made individually  helped
students to explain their proposals promoting discussion among students. We observed
that the number of ideas proposed by the groups which worked with rotation were higher.

6 Discussion

The obtained results allow us to answer positively to the research question about the
perception students got from the contribution of Sketchpad to the collaborative activity.
They expressed they could interact with the rest of the participants during the activity
and that this interaction was fruitful. This assertion is backed by the 67,85 over 100 score
they assigned to the creativity factor of the tool. In the same way, we can conclude that
students had a positive perception about working with rotations, since students who
worked with this modality evaluated all factors better than those working without rota‐
tions.  Performing  the  activity  with  rotations  gave  students  the  opportunity  to  get
acquainted with various points of view, often diﬀerent from their own ones, in a short
period of time and consider them when preparing the ﬁnal proposal. In this way, we
wanted to shape a pedagogical activity with a strong collaborative component, a key
element for the emergence and development of creativity, based on the approaches
proposed by Fisher [8] Csikszentmihalyi, Egeström (described also in [8]) and Sawyer,
2006  [11].  This  has  been  backed  by  the  observations  of  a  collaborative  activity
performed by students, where we identiﬁed that new ideas emerged from discussions
among participants. Another key element considered for shaping the activity was exter‐
nalization, proposed by Bruner [13] and Schön [14], which was achieved incorporating
sketching which students have to elaborate and share, which gave students the oppor‐
tunity to know new perspectives, thus promoting creativity. During the activity sketches
were used to explain ideas, being a central element for discussion.

Results obtained about collaboration during the collaborative activity let us believe
that the proposed tool, Sketchpad, can be successfully used to support  pedagogical
activities in classroom that promote creativity skills. The diﬀerence between the results
obtained with participants who worked with rotations and without them let us think that
Sketchpad could be more eﬀective when is used for supporting collaborative activities,
as well as in activities requiring a tool for sharing ideas.

Students who worked in both groups, with and without rotation mentioned collab‐
oration as the faction which Sketchpad supports most, which indicates this is perhaps
the most relevant factor of the tool. Although the expressiveness (externalization) was
the third one selected by the students as the most important factor, was the best evaluated.
This let us consider that Sketchpad is successful for supporting an activity based on
collaboration and externalization for promoting creativity through brainsketching.

As future work we consider important to make more experiments with a higher

number of students to validate these preliminary results.

1. Griﬃn, P., McGaw, B., Care, E.: Assessment and Teaching of 21st Century Skills. Springer,

2. Schlee, R.P., Harich, K.R.: Teaching creativity to business students: how well are we doing?

J. Educ. Bus. 89(3), 133–141 (2014)

3. Fekula,  M.J.:  Managerial  creativity,  critical  thinking,  and  emotional  intelligence:

convergence in course design. Bus. Educ. Innov. J. 30(2), 92–101 (2011)

4. AACSB.: Standard 9. Curriculum content is appropriate to general expectations for the degree
program type and learning goals (2013) http://www.aacsb.edu/accreditation/standards/2013-
business/learning-and-teaching/standard9.aspx

5. AACSB.: Teaching Design for Creativity and Innovation (2015). http://www.aacsb.edu/en/

events/Seminars/curriculum-development-series/design-thinking.aspx

6. Harvard  Business  Review.  Harvard  Business  Review  Search:  Creativity  (2015).  https://

hbr.org/search?term=creativity

7. Rotherham, A.J., Willingham, D.: 21st century. Educ. Leadersh. 67(1), 16–21 (2009)
8. Fischer, G.: Social creativity: turning barriers into opportunities for collaborative design. In:
Proceedings  of  the  Eighth  Conference  on  Participatory  Design:  Artful  Integration:
Interweaving Media, Materials and Practices, ACM (2004)

9. Amabile, T.: Creativity in Context. Westview press, Boulder (1996)
10. Vyas, D., et al.: Collaborative practices that support creativity in design. In: Wagner, I.,

Tellioğlu, H., Balka, E., Simone, C., Ciolf, L. (eds.) ECSCW 2009, pp. 151–170. (2009)

11. Wegerif,  R.,  et  al.:  Exploring  creative  thinking  in  graphically  mediated  synchronous

dialogues. Comput. Educ. 54(3), 613–621 (2010)

12. Hennessy,  S.:  The  role  of  digital  artefacts  on  the  interactive  whiteboard  in  supporting

classroom dialogue. J. Comput. Assist. Learn. 27(6), 463–489 (2011)

13. Bruner, J.S.: The Culture Of Education. Harvard University Press, Cambridge (1996)
14. Schön, D.A.: The Reﬂective Practitioner: How Professionals Think in Action, vol. 5126.

Basic Books, New York (1983)

15. Zurita, G., Baloian, N., Baytelman, F.: A collaborative face-to-face design support system

based on sketching and gesturing. Adv. Eng. Inform. 22(3), 340–349 (2008)

16. Zurita,  G.,  Baloian,  N.,  Baytelman,  F.:  A  face-to-face  system  for  supporting  mobile
collaborative  design  using  sketches  and  pen-based  gestures.  In:  2006  10th  International
Conference  on  Computer  Supported  Cooperative  Work  in  Design  CSCWD  2006,  IEEE
(2006)

17. Guzdial, M., Rick, J., Kehoe, C.: Beyond adoption to invention: Teacher-created collaborative

activities in higher education. J. Learn. Sci. 10(3), 265–279 (2001)

18. Van der Lugt, R.: Brainsketching and how it diﬀers from brainstorming. Creativity Innov.

208

G. Zurita et al.

References

Dordrecht (2011)

Manage. 11(1), 43–54 (2002)

19. Van der Lugt, R.: How sketching can aﬀect the idea generation process in design group

meetings. Des. Stud. 26(2), 101–122 (2005)

20. Lane, D., Seery, N., Gordon, S.: Promoting creative discovery and mental synthesis through
freehand sketching. In: Visualizing Change–Graphics on the Horizon ASEE Engineering
Design Graphics Division 65th Mid-Year Conference October (2010)
21. Pickens, J.: Brainsketching. University of Oklahoma, Norman (1980)
22. Linsey, J.S., et al.: An experimental study of group idea generation techniques: understanding
the roles of idea representation and viewing methods. J. Mech. Des. 133(3), 031008-1–15
(2011)

Sketchpad: A Learning Tool Supporting Creativity

209

23. Shah, J.J., Vargas‐Hernandez, N.O.E., Summers, J. D., Kulkarni, S.: Collaborative sketching
(C‐Sketch)—An idea generation technique for engineering design. J. Creative Behav. 35(3),
168–198 (2001)

24. Beavers, J., et al.: The Learning Experience Project: Enabling Collaborative Learning with

Conference XP. Microsoft Research (2004)

25. Alvarez,  C.,  et  al.:  Collboard:  fostering  new  media  literacies  in  the  classroom  through
collaborative problem solving supported by digital pens and interactive whiteboards. Comput.
Educ. 63, 368–379 (2013)

26. van  Joolingen,  W.R.,  et  al.:  Co-Lab:  research  and  development  of  an  online  learning
environment for collaborative scientiﬁc discovery learning. Comput. Hum. Behav. 21(4),
671–688 (2005)

27. Titus, P.A.: Applied creativity: the creative marketing breakthrough model. J. Mark. Educ.

29(3), 262–272 (2007)

106–115 (2008)

28. Aylesworth, A.: Improving case discussion with an improv mind-set. J. Mark. Educ. 30(2),

29. Carroll, E.A., et al.: Creativity factor evaluation: towards a standardized survey metric for
creativity  support.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  Seventh  ACM  Conference  on  Creativity  and
Cognition, pp. 127–136 (2009)

30. Frez,  J.,  Baloian,  N.,  Zurita,  G.:  Software  platform  to  build  geo-collaborative  systems
supporting design and planning. In: 2012 IEEE 16th International Conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work in Design (CSCWD), IEEE (2012)

31. Baloian, N., Gutierrez, F., Zurita, G.: An architecture for developing distributed collaborative
applications  using  HTML5.  In:  2013  IEEE  17th  International  Conference  on  Computer
Supported Cooperative Work in Design (CSCWD), IEEE (2013)

