 

Using Geo-collaboration and Microblogging to Support 

Learning: Identifying Problems and Opportunities   

for Technological Business 

Gustavo Zurita1 and Nelson Baloian2 

1 Management Control and Information Systems Department, Universidad de Chile 

gzurita@fen.uchile.cl 

2 Department of Computer Science, Universidad de Chile 

nbaloian@dcc.uchile.cl 

Abstract.  Many  services  are  nowadays  offering  the  use  of  a  (¨Cloud”)  which 
allows large groups of people to interact with one another in different ways by 
means  of  sharing  textual  information,  to  collaboratively  constructing  complex 
information  objects  using  text,  images,  maps,  and  other  multimedia  information.
  Current  literature  reports  a  number  of  works  where  these  services  have 
been  used  to  support  collaborative  learning.  The  reliability,  scalability  and 
ubiquity are the characteristics that make these services especially convenient in 
supporting  large  group  collaborative  learning  activities  that  require  computer 
support in various settings, in and outside the classroom. In this work we first 
analyze the use of Google Maps for supporting a learning activity in an urban 
environment,  concluding  that  some  important  features  are  missing.  We  then 
propose  an  approach  for  taking  advantage  of  cloud  computing  services  for 
learning  activities  by  integrating  different  services  in  a  new  application.  We 
conclude  that  this  approach  may  be  used  for  further  developing  applications 
supporting large group learning activities.     

1 

Introduction 

It is not uncommon that students of a business degree program have to attend a course 
in which they are asked to identify situations in real contexts, for which, the introduction 
 of  solutions  based  on  Information  Technology  might  be  an  opportunity  to  improve 
the life or solve a problem for citizens that frequently circulate around that area, 
live or work there. This is also true for students of an Urban Planning program. We 
can also imagine other situations where students have to geographically identify spots 
with troubles and/or opportunities and collaboratively propose, discuss and select the 
most appropriate solutions.   

Learning  activities  taking  place  in  real  situations  (as  opposed  to  the  “laboratory” 
setting)  in  which  the  real  context  and  collaboration  among  learners  themselves  and 
between learners and experts  are important clues to the success of the learning outcome.
  This  can  be  considered  as  belonging  to  the  Situated  Learning  theory  which 
states that students have to apply the knowledge they are acquiring in the location and 

P. Antunes et al. (Eds.): CRIWG 2013, LNCS 8224, pp. 215–232, 2013. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 

216 

G. Zurita and N. Baloian 

context where it is needed. If one adds to this that the geographical location information 
plays an important role, we can also say that this activity can be classified as a 
geo-collaborative one, which has been defined as collaborative tasks performed by a 
group  of  people  involving  the  contextualization,  construction  and  exchange  of  georeferenced 
data. On the other hand, microblogging has often been used as a means to 
support decision-making processes, as it helps to comment and rank ideas, which are 
options to solve a problem.   

In this work, we first report on a work done in order to test the hypothesis whether 
it is possible to use Google Maps “as is” in order to support a rather large group of 
students engaged in a situated learning activity. This consists in collaboratively identifying 
 opportunities  to  improve  life  or  solve  problems  in  a  certain  area  of  the  city 
where they live which has to geo-referenced in a map. They have to generate, discuss 
and select the 10 best ideas. After four semesters, according to the feedback given by 
the  students,  we  concluded  Google  Maps  alone  was  not  enough.  We  took  the  comments 
 of  the  students  as  input  for  establishing  the  requirements  for  a  system  which 
could  help  them  to  accomplish  the  task.  We  also  took  some  principles  of  decisionmaking 
 from  the  literature  in  order  to  complete  the  requirements.  A  prototype  of  a 
system developed to cope with the requirements was used for one semester and evaluated 
 the  same  way  we  did for  Google  Maps, obtaining  positive  results  and  which 
gave  us  valuable  insight  into  what  the  main  features  are  of  a  system  supporting  situated 
 learning  activities  for  large  groups  including  decision  making  and  geocollaboration.
   

2 

Geo-collaboration to Facilitating Context Awareness   

According  to  [1,  2]  geo-collaboration  is  the  modeling  of  collaborative  tasks  performed 
 by  a  group  of  people  involving  the  contextualization,  construction  and  exchange 
of  geo-referenced data based on a  human-computer interface that shows the 
map  of  the  physical  zone  in  the  background,  where  the  tasks  are  being  performed 
and/or  spatially  contextualized  by  using  mobile  devices  or  desktop  computers.  The 
tasks may involve collaborative explorations and mapping meaningful representations 
[3]; making geospatial decisions collaboratively in situations, like crisis management 
[4, 5]; building planning [6]; and/or defining strategies [7].   

The task may involve the development of pedagogical practices to support learning.
  According  to  [8-10],  conducting  collaborative  educational  activities  using  georeferencing 
data in authentic contexts enables students to establish significant cognitive 
relationships between what was seen inside the classroom and what is seen in a 
real context, [11]. Furthermore, students may collaboratively work by doing learning 
tasks at the same time and in the same place (by social interaction in a real physical 
context),  at  the  same  time  and  in  different  places  (social  or  virtual  interaction  in  a 
remote context), at different times in the same place (virtual interaction in a real con-
text), or at different times in different places (virtual interaction in a remote context). 
Geo-collaborative  tasks  supporting  educational  practices  are  based  on  the  Situated 
Learning  theory, which states that learning requires theoretical concepts learned inside 
 a  classroom  to  be  linked  to  practical  and  real  situations  in  authentic  contexts 
where they can be applied [12]. Regarding this, [13] suggest that learning improves 

 

 

Using Geo-collaboration and Microblogging to Support Learning 

217 

when knowledge is presented in a real and authentic context, i.e., settings which normally 
require that knowledge. They also claim that learning requires social or virtual 
interaction and collaboration among the students.   

The  chapter  is  organized  as  follows.  In  section  2.1,  we  propose  a  pedagogical 
learning activity which requires students to identify problems and/or opportunities in 
an urban area which require innovative solutions based on information technology. In 
section 2.2, we analyze the advantages of microblogging service to support decisionmaking 
process; and in section 2.3 we describe the fundamental requirements of this 
geo-collaborative decision-making processes. 

2.1  Description  of  the  Geo-collaborative  Activities  for  Identifying  Problems 

and/or Opportunities for Technology-Related Business 

The geo-collaborative application we present in this work has been developed in order 
to support students in a scenario  where they  have to propose ideas, geo-referencing 
them in a map so the rest of the group can collaboratively comment on and rate them 
in order to reach a common decision about which are the best. The learning goal is to 
develop skills in order to identify realistic problems and/or opportunities in an urban 
area and propose creative solutions based on information technology. Thus, the geocollaborative 
 tasks  follow  the  basic  decision-making  model:  generate  ideas  (brains-
torming),  analyze/discuss  them  (in  a  divergence  and  convergence  mode),  and  select 
the best ones (in a convergence mode). In such a scenario we will have the following 
key  activities,  which  we  would  like  to  support:  a)  A  student  generates  a  georeferenced 
idea at the same place (using mobile devices) or remotely using texts, pictures,
 and/or any other multimedia material. b) After the idea is published by its author,
 all students can see and associate comments positive or negative comments to it. 
It is expected that the interaction for commenting the ideas is done remotely although 
they can go and physically visit the place where the idea has been geo-localized. c) 
Students  select  the  best  ideas  using  ranking  and/or  voting  mechanisms,  which  are 
expected to be used asynchronously. According to [14], the above described learning 
tasks, introduce an added value to situated learning applications. 

2.2 

Including Microblogging to Support Geo-collaboration   

According to [15], the use of Twitter – the most popular microblog today, may promote 
the formation of online communities and facilitate the interaction among learners 
through the exchange of text messages associated to photographs, documents and 
videos on the Internet. 

Microblogging services have been introduced in various educational scenarios and 
the  evaluations  of  these  experiences  report  two  benefits  for  the  learning  process:  a) 
ease of use, and b) the positive impact in various pedagogical practices. In [16], authors 
report that the complexity level for using microblogs is low and independent of 
the  computer  device  which  is  being  used.  Normally  a  computer,  with  browser  and 
Internet connection is enough. Additionally it is available for its continuous use over 
an extended period of time, allows easier and faster access to information, when and 
where it is needed. These characteristics allow curriculum designers to focus on the 
development  of  the  didactics  instead  of  on  problems  related  with  the  use  of  the   

 

218 

G. Zurita and N. Baloian 

microblogging platform. Various authors have found that its use positively influences 
important learning aspects like collaboration [17, 18], creativity [17], development of 
communication skills [17-19], rising ICT Literacy [16], as well as the productivity in 
the generation of ideas and self-direction [17, 18]. Additionally, it has been found to 
promote Lifelong Learning [16, 17] and the insertion of users in communities of practice 
[18, 20]. 

According to [21, 22], the information generated in a microblog could be efficiently 
used to support virtual decision-making processes, like the one we are proposing in 
the  section  2.1.,  according  to  our  understanding.  Researchers  report  in  [23,  24]  that 
the reasons people confess why they use microblogging are: a) keeping in touch, b) 
promoting  certain  kind  of  interesting  information,  c)  asking  and  doing  comments. 
These reasons match with important aspects we consider user should have in order to 
perform  the  tasks  described  in  2.1  properly.  Summarizing,  microbloging  supports 
collaborative  work,  communication,  creativity,  brainstorming,  ranking  and  selecting 
proposals, all these activities being at the core of the activity proposed in 2.1. 

2.3  Models for Decision-Making Process in Geo-collaborative Environments 

Group decision-making is a collaborative effort performed by a team of individuals, 
in order to accomplish certain tasks or attain a goal. It involves series of social interactions,
  like  interaction,  communication,  deliberation,  and  other  activities  such  as 
generating  ideas,  asking  and  answering  questions,  making  comments,  searching  information,
 or selecting ideas. These interactions may or may be not be mediated by 
computer technologies. The process of decision-making has been subject of research 
for decades. The work presented in [25] proposes the Cooperative Decision Making 
model,  which  emphasizes  the  importance  of  negotiating  conflicts  (Identification   
Processing    Negotiation).  The  Participatory  Decision  Making  model  [26]  distinguishes 
between divergent and convergent collaboration modes (Divergent  Groan 
  Convergent    Closure).  The  Collaboration  Engineering  model  [27]  synthesizes 
decision-making  as  a  collection  of  behavioral  patterns  that  may  be  “engineered”  to 
respond to contextual situations (Diverge, Organize, Evaluate, Build consensus, and 
Converge).   

As is mentioned in [22, 28], decision-making seems to be organized according to 
three main decision-making patterns: (1) information gathering and brainstorming 
of  ideas  in  a  divergent  mode;  (2)  find  alternatives,  information  processing  and 
comments of alternatives using divergence and convergence modes; and (3) make 
choices in a convergent mode. In our case, we consider the following subset of fundamental 
 requirements  of  geo-collaborative  decision-making  processes  proposed  in 
[28]: Perception support. Geo-collaborative decision-making tools should associate 
changes in geo-referenced data with adequate perception mechanisms, e.g., visualization 
based on pictures backed  with text descriptions, and storyboards to organize in 
the form of pictures displayed in sequence, for the purpose of facilitate the contextual 
representation and understanding of an idea [29, 30]. Retention support. Retention is 
a  fundamental  driver  to  construct  individual  and  group  memory  and  contributes  to 
enact adequate responses whenever recognizable situations emerge. Geo-collaborative 
decision-making  tools  should  therefore  maintain  a  repository  of  the  geo-referenced 
data,  and  their  comments  and  rakings.  Externalization  support.  Externalization  is 

 

 

Using Geo-collaboration and Microblogging to Support Learning 

219 

essential  to  information  gathering  and  brainstorming  of  ideas,  since  knowledge  is 
constructed  by  articulating  tacit  knowledge  into  shared  explicit  expectancies,  cues, 
goals  and  actions.  Divergent/convergent  support.  Decision-making  seems  to  be 
organized  according  to  intertwined  cycles  of  divergent  and  convergent  activities, 
where divergent activities favor problem identification and information gathering, and 
convergent  activities  promote 
the  negotiation  and  selection  of  alternatives. 
Task/pattern  management.  The  decision-making  process  seems  to  be  organized 
according  with  a  set  of  patterned  activities  such  as  divergence,  convergence,  data 
organization, option evaluation, etc. Geo-collaborative decision-making tools should 
carefully avoid prescribing rigid structures; they should also support the way of controlling 
by implementing task/pattern management.   

3 

Evaluating Google Maps “as it is” for Identifying Problems 
and/or Opportunities for Technology-Related Business   

We made a realistic experiment in order to have some insight about the suitability of 
Google Maps to support geo-collaborative learning tasks involving all students of an 
undergraduate course on Information Technology for Business as a single team (see 
section  2.1).  We  used  the  same  methodology  and  experiment  design,  and  applied  a 
similar questionnaires as in the work reported in [31]. However, the results were analyzed 
for a different purpose: this time the focus was to find out which functionalities 
were missing or not properly supported to accomplish the tasks. Another difference is 
that in [31] we reported the results of using Google Maps in one semester, here  we 
present data gathered during 4 consecutive semesters. 

3.1  Task Description, Sample, Technical Setup and Data Collect Methodology   

The  experiment  involved  students  from  an  undergraduate  course  undertaking  a   
collaborative  assignment  which  consisted  on  identifying  realistic  problems  and/or 
opportunities in an urban area and propose innovative solutions based on information 
technology. Students were asked to wander around an urban area near the faculty in 
order to accomplish this “Situated Learning-type” task. They were asked to perform 
the task using Google Maps because it allows the generation geo-referenced tags annotated 
with text and it is a highly available and popular tool, which means it requires 
a minimal amount of user training. 

This assignment was applied four times, each semester starting from first semester 
of 2011 and ending the second semester of 2012. The sample consisted of 50, 48, 48 
and 46 students, for each semester; 30, 26, 24 and 28 male; average age 23.3, 22.8, 
23.1 and 22.3 respectively. They were taking an undergraduate course on Information 
Technology for Business, in the eighth semester of the Information and Management 
Control Engineering degree program of Economics and Business Faculty of the Universidad 
de Chile. It is expected that students taking this course are able at the end of 
the course to: (a) detect problems and identify opportunities in an organization, that 
may be supported by Information Technology (IT); (b) manage an IT strategy that can 
introduce  competitive  advantages  into  an  organization;  (c)  design  IT  solutions  for  a 
business project; and (d) develop communication and teamwork skills. These students 

 

220 

G. Zurita and N. Baloian 

are good users of computing technology: 55% use notebooks or tablets in classes and 
most  have  smartphones,  all  of  them  have  PC  at  home.  They  regularly  use  popular 
desktop software; and use social media tools like Twitter, Facebook, and Skype. 

 

Fig. 1. Two Google maps instances collaboratively geo-referenced by the students (2nd semester 
of 2011 to the left, and 2nd semester of 2012 to the right). The list of ideas is shown on the left 
side. Geo-references are displayed as icons on the map representing the location for these ideas. 
Text and pictures describe ideas presented by students. The screenshot on the right shows the 
interface with a geo-referenced idea showing the comments to this idea. 

Regarding  the  technical  setup,  the  task  was  performed  collaboratively  outside 
regular  classes.  All  students  were  part  of  a  single  team.  The  teacher  explained  the 
assignment in the classroom, recommending the students to observe an area and identify 
problems, opportunities and ideas that may be addressed using IT, which should 
be geo-referenced in Google Maps. Students were also asked to discuss and give their 
opinions on the classmates’ ideas and collaboratively choose the ten best by  mutual 
agreement. Students had one week to perform the assignment. No instruction regarding 
the type of hardware to be used or the coordination mechanism to select the best 
ideas was given. They were just told they should use Google Maps. Consensus rules, 
task  awareness  and  coordination  mechanisms  had  to  be  established  by  the  students 
themselves. Following the instructions, students performed the assignment accordingly.
 Pictures taken with mobile phones, cameras or even taken from Street View were 

 

 

Using Geo-collaboration and Microblogging to Support Learning 

221 

uploaded  in  Google  Maps.  Some  documentation  of  the  activities  done  with  Google 
Maps is shown in Figure 1.   

From  these  experiences,  we  collected  data  from  the  questionnaires  that  the   

students filled out at the end of the activity, containing questions that required quantitative 
 as  well  as  open  answers.  For  this  work,  questionnaires  and  the  subsequent 
analysis  were  organized  in  three  major  categories,  namely  information  overload, 
usability  (easy  to  use),  and  collaboration  support.  As  in  [31],  the  strategy  we 
adopted to analyze the results consisted in using open questions to find insights about 
the  suitability  of  Google  Maps  to  accomplish  the  proposed  task.  The  responses  to 
these open questions  were sequentially analyzed and coded in two rounds. The first 
one  aimed  to  identify  relevant  codes  and  the  second  one  aimed  to  revise  codes  and 
improve the quality of the coding process, [32]. Although the students were instructed 
to  use  Google  Maps  they  also  used  Google  Docs  (spreadsheet,  and  text  processor) 
collaboratively in order to support the discussion and convergence process.  For this 
reason  we additionally analyzed the students’ usage of these tools trying to identify 
which processes and data structures were the most frequently used in order to obtain 
additional functional requirements.   

3.2 

Findings of the Experiment 

As we mentioned before, from the questionnaire applied in [31], we only take in account 
the next three open questions: Q1: “Did you feel information overload during 
the task?”, Q2: “How easy was the software itself to use”, and Q3: “How easy to use 
was the collaboration support?”. Students were asked to comment and describe positive 
and negative aspects of the software they used related to the question. From the 
qualitative analysis of the data we obtained the results shown in Tables 1, 2, and 3. 

According to table 1 the most negative comment about information overload was 
associated with the difficulty to identify and follow the many ideas generated and the 
comments associated to them. On average, 16.8 students mentioned this problem each 
semester. Students mentioned that using only Goggle Maps, as it was instructed, made 
it difficult to aggregate all comments made for one idea. In the 4 semesters students 
used additional documents from Google Docs for writing their comments (see figure 
2 left). The text editor and the spreadsheet  were used to collect the comments. Mechanisms 
used to associates ideas in Google Map to the comments were: a) repetition 
of the title and/or description of the idea (see Figure 2 right) b) generation of an identification 
number for each (see the numbers associated to ideas in Figure 2).   

In all cases the number of generated comments made it difficult to follow and read 
them completely. Many students mentioned they read only a subset of the ideas and 
comments because they were simply too much. They also indicated that it was difficult 
to find the new ideas and comments out of the old ones, as well as finding a certain 
idea or comment previously read again. It was even more difficult to associate the 
geo-referenced information in Google Maps with the ideas and comments in Google 
Docs. Only during the second semester of 2012 students tried to associate comments 
to the corresponding idea in the same document in Google Maps. Students started to 
write their comments just after the text written as information to the geo-referenced 
idea,  adding  their  names  to  the  comment.  However,  additional  Google  Docs  documents 
were used in order to implement the selection and voting for the best ideas.   

 

222 

G. Zurita and N. Baloian 

Table  1. Qualitative coding of students’ answers to the questionnaire and the frequency they 
were mentioned associated with Q1. Sn = Semester n; Avg. = average 

Q1: Did you feel information overload during the task? 

Positive comments 

Negative comments 

 

Year/Semester 
2011 
 2012 
Avg.  S2  S1  S2 S1 

 

1.8  3  2  0

2 Everyone  was  available  on 

the computer screen  

 

Year/Semester 
2011 
 2012 

 

Avg.  S2  S1  S2  S1 
16.8 21 12 15 19 Too  many  ideas  and  comments 

shown at the same time 

2  2  2  3

1 Work was performed orderly 

6.5

5

8

7

6 Some  contributions  were  duplicated 


1.5  3  0  1

2 History  of ideas  was  easy to 

10.5 16 14 10

2 Considerable  flow  of  ideas  and 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

follow 
 

 

 

 

feedback 

9.3 14

8

9

6 Relation  between  ideas  and  comments 
difficult to establish 

11.5 12 15 12

7 Related ideas are shown apart from 

each other 

4.8

5

7.3 12

4

9

8

6

2 Too  many  objects  shown  in  the 

same window at the same time 

2 Some  comments  were  simply 

forgotten  

The result of having comments separated from the ideas implied that the high flow 
of ideas and their comments that were created was difficult to follow and easy to forget 
(10.5 on average); and therefore, the number of repeated ideas was considered high and 
that  they  were  difficult  to  detect  (6.5  on  average);  or  that  it  was  easy  to  forget  the 
comments they already read due to the high number of proposals and comments (7.3 
on average).Very few positive comments were expressed. The most relevant was that 
the participants liked having all information available on the computer screen. 

Table  2. Qualitative coding of students’ answers to the questionnaire and the frequency they 
were mentioned associated with Q2. Sn = Semester n; Avg. = average 

Q2: How easy was the software itself to use? 

Positive comments 

Negative comments 

 

Year/Semester 
 2012 
2011 

 

Avg.  S2  S1  S2  S1 
8.3 

8 

9 

6 10  Easy to understand   

 

Year/Semester 
 2012 
2011 

 

Avg.  S2  S1  S2  S1 

6.5

6

7

5

5

8

8 Proximate comments are difficult 

to discern  

6 Cannot  see  who  deleted  comments 


3  Immediate  visualization  of 

7.3 10

new comments 
2  Reference  of 

ideas 

in 

11 12 10 15

7 Lacks coordination support 

geographical context 

2  Using of colors 
2  Using of text and pictures 
1  Use of icons  
1  Easy access to ideas 

10.5 14 12 10
1.3
1
2
6.3
6
9
9.3 13 11
9

0
8

6 Mapping and chatting unrelated 
2 Slow 
2 No private working space  
4 Had  to  improvise  in  order  to 

collaborate 

1  Searching 

8.5 9 

12  8 

5 Difficult  to  merge  comments, 

ideas 

   

8 11 7 

9 

5 Communication  is  not  primarily 

focus 

2

4

1
4
3
3

0

4 

5 

2 
6 
1 
0 

0 

 

0 

3 

0 
2 
2 
2 

2 

 

2.3 

3.5 

1.3 
3.5 
1.8 
1.5 

0.8 

 

 

 

Using Geo-collaboration and Microblogging to Support Learning 

223 

Comments to Q2 reveal several technical issues contributing to the perceived low 
usability  (see  Table  2).  The  most  negative  comment  was  related  to  the  lack  of  mechanisms 
 to  easily  associate  the  geo-referenced  ideas  and  the  “conversation”  associated 
resulting from the comments given to it (average 10.5). In fact, the lack of this 
kind of functionality was the reason given by the students for having to use additional 
documents in Google Docs. From the analysis of Q1 focused on information overload 
revealed that the most important negative aspect was that it was difficult to follow the 
ideas and the comments associated. Q2 revealed that from the usability point of view 
the most negative aspect was the association of the ideas written in Google Maps with 
their comments in Google Docs. An interesting result of the analysis was that students 
tried  to  structure  the  information  in  Google  Docs  in  a  similar  way  a  microblogging 
service would do: short messages arguing for or against the proposition (see Figure 2). 

 
Fig. 2. To the left: extract of a Google Docs document (text editor) with the proposition of an 
idea and the comments associated. To the right: the upper part shows a screenshot from Google 
Maps, which a proposal identified with the number 23. The screenshot under it shows a Google 
Docs document with this number, the same title, some photos and the description of the proposed 
idea.   

 

224 

G. Zurita and N. Baloian 

The second negative aspect is related with the lacks of coordination support (with a 
frequency of 11 points on average). In some occasions a coordinator was elected by 
the students who would establish accords about deadlines for generating idea proposals,
 number of comments expected and deadlines for generating them, voting mechanisms,
 etc.; because Google Maps nor Google Docs provide such mechanisms. One of 
the most cited arguments about lack of coordination mechanisms was that in Google 
Maps  all  ideas  would  look  like  having  the  same  relevance  and  only  after  carefully 
reading all comments they would find which are the most preferred ones.   

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
Fig. 3. At the left, a screenshot of the matrix students confectioned using Google Docs. Each 
row corresponds to an idea and the columns to the rating given by one student to the idea. At 
the right a screenshot of a text written with Google Docs with a table in which each row corresponds 
 to  a  student  and  the  columns  to  a  subset  of  relevant  pre-selected  ideas  which  will  be 
ranked; students evaluated each idea with a number from 1 to 7. 

The third negative comment with a frequency of 9.3 points is associated with the 
need to improvise collaboration strategies since the tool does not offer clear support in 
that area. Students  missed a functionality  which could help them to count favorable 
and unfavorable comments given to an idea. In three from the four semesters students 
used  a  spreadsheet  from  Google  Docs  instead  (see  Figure  3).  In  one  semester  they 
used a simple table from the text editor (see Figure 3 to the right). 

The next negative aspect (average frequency of 8.5) was the difficulty for combining 
ideas with their comments in a single view. This aspect can be clearly seen from 
the screenshots shown in Figure 1 showing the geo-referenced proposals and the one 
in  Figure  2  showing  the  Google  Docs  document  with  the  comments.  Even  when  in 
one  semester  students  did  write  the  comments  in  the  same  place  with  the  ideas  on 
Google  Maps  (see  screenshot  on  the  left  of  Figure  1),  they  were  afterwards  copied 
into a document for rating, as seen in Figure 3. This also explains the high frequency 

 

 

Using Geo-collaboration and Microblogging to Support Learning 

225 

(8.0)  of  negative  comments  complaining  that  there  was  no  simple  communication 
mechanism for commenting the ideas, express preferences and rating.   

Other negative aspects mentioned were that any student could modify or even delete 
the contributions made by another (7.3), difficulties for differentiating comments 
when their geo-referenced locations in Google Maps was near (6.5), and the absence 
of  private  workspace  before  publishing  the  ideas  (6.3).  The  most  relevant  positive 
aspect mentioned was that Google Maps was easy to use.   

An  interesting  aspect  was  that  many  of  the  ideas  which  were  also  presented  in 
Google  Docs  were  extended  compared  to  the  one  geo-referenced  in  Google  Maps. 
They were described with more detail sometimes taking the format of storyboards, in 
order to give better context to the idea [29, 30]. Table 3 shows students’ stand regarding 
to question Q3, i.e. how easy to use was the collaboration support provided by the 
system, with clear emphasis on the negative side. Two reasons were very prominent: 
a)  the  group  had  to  develop  coordination  and  a  collaborative  mechanism  (using 
Google Docs) since the Google Maps “as it is” does not provide any (12.8); and b) the 
problem that any participant may modify or delete comments without control or rollback 
(11.5).   

Students mentioned that they had to resort on mechanisms defined by them to synchronize 
their work, like establishing deadlines for proposing, commenting and ranking 
 them.  Despite  this  agreement  many  students  expressed  their  preference  to  work 
without  deadlines.  Also  many  students  suggested  that  the  time  period  for  making 
comments to ideas should be immediately after their publication, otherwise they might 
forget what they wanted to say after reading it if they have to wait for that. Students 
expressed that geo-referencing ideas over a map was a good way to give context and 
with  this,  more  understanding  of  the  problem  or  opportunity  the  idea  was  tackling. 
They mentioned that using one system for geo-referencing ideas and then another for 
discussing them was rather inefficient, since they had to manage two systems and input 
same the information two times. According to the students, the information generated 
for Google Maps, as well as for Google Docs, should not be collaboratively editable in 
order to avoid students modifying opinions of their classmates. 

Table  3. Qualitative coding of students’ answers to the questionnaire and the frequency they 
were mentioned associated with Q3. Sn = Semester n; Avg. = average 

Q3: How easy to use was the collaboration support? 

Positive comments 

Negative comments 

 

Year/Semester 
 2012 
2011 
Avg.  S2  S1  S2 S1 

 

3.8  6  3  2

4 Shared view of ideas  

 

Year/Semester 
 2012 
2011 

 

Avg.  S2  S1  S2  S1 
12.8 16

9 12 14 Group had to develop alternatives 

for coordinating group work 

1.3  2  2  0

1 Easies problem understanding  11.5 15 11

8 12 Users  can  edit  others’  contribu0.
8  2  0  0

1 Facilitates  view  of 

task 

8.3 11

progress 

1.8  3  2  0

2 Permits asynchronous interac4.
8

6

1.0  2  1  0
0.5  0  0  1

 

 

 

tion 

1 Easies time management 
1 Uses colors 

 

8.5 12
2.5
4
7.3
9

tions 

7 Tool  inadequate  for  discussion 

support 

5 Difficult to converge 

6 Asymmetric participation 
2 Lack of chat tool 
5 Lacks awareness mechanisms 

6

3

9
3
8

9

5

7
1
7

 

226 

G. Zurita and N. Baloian 

3.3  Design Requirements Justified from the Findings   

From the results described in the previous section we can conclude that that Google 
Maps “as it is” does not provide all the functionalities to support a collaborative discussion 
and selection of options (ideas) required for a geo-collaborative activity described 
in 3.1. Although it provides convenient mechanisms for geo-referencing data 
collaboratively, it lacks of mechanisms to support decision-making.   

From  Q1  we  can  derive  the  following  requirements:  a)  provide  mechanisms  for 
commenting  and  selecting  ideas  in  the  same  place  where  they  are  geo-referenced 
(brainstorming);  b)  provide  functionalities  supporting  the  following  of  ideas  and 
comments associated by means of searching mechanisms which could help a user to 
follow a certain discussion thread. 

From Q2 we can derive the following requirements: a) provide microblogging-like 
information architecture for commenting the ideas, so it will be easy to identify positive 
and negative opinions for each idea. b) Provide voting and/or rating mechanisms 
to support the convergence stage in the decision-making process. c) Provide mechanisms 
to manage private working spaces whose content can be later published. d) Implement 
editing rights in order to avoid students modify or delete comments or ideas 
which are not their own. e) Provide functionalities which allow students to write their 
idea proposals as “story boards”. f) Design a simple and easy to understand interface 
which allows to geo-reference ideas informing the physical context where they should 
be performed, which allows also collaboratively commenting and rating them.     

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Fig. 4. Two screenshots of the application, the small one taken from a Smartphone, and the big 
one from a desktop computer screen 

 

 

Using Geo-collaboration and Microblogging to Support Learning 

227 

From  Q3  we  can  derive:  a)  provide  a  collaborative  workspace  which  allows  students 
to propose their geo-referenced ideas enriched by text and images (brainstorming 
and storyboard), comment them (in divergence and convergence modes); and state 
their  preferences  (convergence).  b)  Include  brainstorming,  divergence,  and  convergence 
 processes  in  an  iterative  and  cyclic  way,  allowing  students  to  propose  ideas, 
comment them and/or rating them during all the process.   

4 

Prototype Proposed to Tackle Problems of Google Maps   
“as is it” 

In this section we propose a prototype application which uses geo-collaboration and 
microblogging to support the situated learning activity described in section 2.1 whose 
design is based on the requirements presented in section 3.3 which were derived after 
analyzing the answers given by students to questions Q1, Q2, and Q3 about the usage 
of Google Maps “as it is” for supporting this learning activity. It also includes design 
patterns required for a decision-making support system (described in section 2.3). The 
application has been developed with HTML5, thus users only needs a device with a 
browser and an Internet connection to run it. 

4.1  Description of the Prototype   

Figure  4,  shows  the  main  view  of  the  proposed  prototype  as  seen  on  a  screen  of  a 
Smartphone and a desktop computer. We will describe this prototype according to the 
three decision-making patterns identified in section 2.3:   

(1) Information gathering and brainstorming the ideas in a divergent mode. Students 
can geo-reference concrete physical locations where the proposed idea is going 
to be put into reality. This will include a title, a textual description and maybe pictures 
in order to better contextualize the proposal. The description on the left-hand side is 
always associated to one certain location on the map, which is shown when this location 
 is  selected,  thus  changing  the  selected  location  (for  example  to  show  another 
proposal  or  start  creating  a  new  geo-located  idea)  will  also  change  the  description 
associated. In this way we tacle design requirement a), associated to Q1 in section 3.3. 
Picture descriptions may correspond to a sequence of situations describing the context 
of  the  proposal  using  a  story-board  fashion  to  better  understand  it  (see  design  requirement 
e), associated to Q2). The number of pictures is not limited and they may 
be  uploaded  from  a  desktop  computer  or  a  mobile  device  camera,  thus  allowing  a 
student to create a proposal, write the text and take the picture on the spot and upload 
it  attaching  automatically  the  geo-location  using  the  GPS  of  the  mobile  device  if 
present.  Pictures  will  be  shown  using  at  most  half  of  the  left-hand-side  area  of  the 
interface  in  order  to  leave  enough  room  for  the  text  description  and  the  comments 
other students make to it (see design requirement a), associated to Q3). At the beginning 
 each  proposal  of  an  idea  is  created  in  a  private  workspace  or  view.  When  the 
student completes the proposal, it can be shared with the rest of the students in order 
to be commented and/or ranked (see design requirement c), associated to Q2). In the 

 

228 

G. Zurita and N. Baloian 

desktop view of the interface shown in Figure 4 there is a geo-reference marked with 
a ( 
) symbol which means that contribution is currently selected by the user to view 
it and maybe add a comment and/or rate it. The icon showing an open lock beside the 
proposal’s  title  means  it  has  been  made  already  public.  In  the  Smartphone  view  of 
Figure 4 the proposal of the idea is being created, thus is is still private (shown by a 
closed lock icon).   
(2) Find alternatives, information processing and comments of alternatives using 
divergence and convergence modes. In the upper part of the desktop interface view 
shown in Figure 4 we can see the searching tool which searches for ideas by author’s 
name, associated comments words or date of creation. The result of the search will be 
shown as a list under the search tool and the corresponding location of all proposals 
matching  the  search  criteria  will  be  shown  on  the  map.  This  functionality  was  designed 
in order to facilitate the location of proposed ideas which was mentioned as a 
problem and was the cause for establishing design requirement b), associated to Q1 in 
section  3.3.  Comments  associated  to  the  ideas  follow  a  microblogging  structure  as 
stated by design requirement 1, associated to Q2, as we can see at the bottom part of 
the right part of the interface in Figure 4, where two comments made to this idea are 
shown. The management of the comments is facilitated by the way they are organized 
and the method of selection/revision based on simple scrolling and options “expand” 
and “collapse” them. Most recent comments are shown above the older ones in order 
to facilitate the process discussion process during divergence and convergence phases 
of a decision-making process. 

(3) Make  choices  in  a  convergent  mode.  Each  comment  to  a  proposed  idea  has  a 
ranking  mechanism  associated  (see  design  requirement  b),  associated  to  Q2)  which 
allows students to assign points in favor or against the proposal. This mechanism can 
be  seen  in  the  desktop  view  of  the  interface  in  Figure  4,  where  the  last  comment 
shown at the bottom right gives two points in favor for this idea. The sum of all positive 
points minus all negatives votes given to one idea is shown beside the title of that 
idea. Beside this, marks on the map showing the location of the proposed ideas will be 
displayed in three different colors according to the ratings they received from all par-
ticipants: Green for the better rated, blue for the ones rated in the middle range and 
red for the worst rated. In order to comply with design requirement b), associated to 
Q3 ideas can be commented and/or rated as soon as they are made public. Also each 
comment  or  idea  cannot  be  deleted  or  modified  according  to  requirement  d),  associated 
to Q2.   

4.2  Evaluation of the Prototype   

The prototype described in the previous chapter was evaluated under the same conditions 
regarding the educational objectives, technical setup, methods for data collecting 
and its analyze, as the one described in the section 3.1; except that this was evaluated 
for only one semester, which was during the first semester of 2013. The sample consisted 
of 32 students; 14 male; average age 23.5, taking an undergraduate course on 
Information  Technology  for  Business,  in  the  nine  semester  of  Accounting  career,  at 
Economics  and  Business  Faculty  of  the  Universidad  de  Chile.  These  students  were 
also good users of computing technology. 

 

 

Using Geo-collaboration and Microblogging to Support Learning 

229 

Table  4. Qualitative coding of students’ answers to the questionnaire and the frequency they 
were mentioned associated with Q1, Q2 and Q3. Avg4. = Average of 4 semesters 

2013  Avg4.   

2013  Avg4.

 

Q1: Did you feel information overload during the task? 

4 

5 
5 
 

 

 

 

1.8  Everyone was available on the computer 

4 16.8 Too many ideas and comments shown at the 

screen  

2  Work was performed orderly 

1.5  History of ideas was easy to follow 

   

   

   

   

same time 

6,5 Some contributions were duplicated 

0
5 10,5 Considerable flow of ideas and feedback 
0

9,3 Relation  between 
difficult to establish 

ideas  and  comments 

0 11,5 Related  ideas  are  shown  apart  from  each 

other 

3

2

4,8 Too  many  objects  shown  in  the  same  window 
at the same time 

7,3 Some comments were simply forgotten  

2013  Avg4.   

Q2: How easy was the software itself to use? 

2013  Avg4.

 

12 
5 

8,3  Easy to understand (Google Maps use) 
2,3  Immediate  visualization  of  new  comments 


20 

3,5  Reference  of  ideas  in  geographical 

2
0

0

6,5 Proximate comments are difficult to discern  
7,3 Cannot see who deleted comments 

11 Lacks coordination support 

context 

1,3  Using of colors 
3,5  Using of text and pictures 
1,8  Use of icons  
1,5  Easy access to ideas 
0,8  Searching 

   

6 
16 
 
 
 
 

 

0 10,5 Mapping and chatting unrelated 
4
0
1
2
0

1,3 Slow 
6,3 No private working space  
9,3 Had to improvise in order to collaborate 
8,5 Difficult to merge comments, ideas 

8 Communication is not primarily focus 

2013  Avg4.   

2013  Avg4.

 

Q3: How easy to use was the collaboration support? 

18 

3,8  Shared view of ideas  

2 12.8 Group had to develop alternatives for coordi9 

4 
19 
4 
4 
 

1,3  Easies problem understanding 
0,8  Facilitates view of task progress 
1,8  Permits asynchronous interaction 
1,0  Easies time management 
0,5  Uses colors 

   

nating group work 

0 11,5 Users can edit others’ contributions 
3
1
2
1
2

8,3 Tool inadequate for discussion support 
4,8 Difficult to converge 
8,5 Asymmetric participation 
2,5 Lack of chat tool 
7,3 Lacks awareness mechanisms 

 

 

Results obtained (see Table 4), were compared with the mean average obtained for 
the 4 semesters when Google Maps was used “as it is” for questions Q1, Q2 y Q3 in 
order  to  find  out  if  students  perceived  the  improvements  introduced  in  order  to  minimize 
 the  drawbacks.  We  did  not  tabulate  other  qualitative  aspects  than  the  ones 
obtained in the previous testing in order to have a more objective comparison process.   
Comparing  the  results  obtained  when  using  the  new  application  described  in  4.1 
for one semester against the average values obtained when using Google Maps (and 
some  features  from  Google  Docs)  we  can  have  a  first  indication  that  the  proposed 
application performed better. However, we take these as first results, requiring more 
time to experiment in order to obtain more concluding data. Due to the experimental 
because we tried to find differences (hopefully improvements) with the negative evaluated 
 aspects  of  the  first  experiment  but  there  might  be  other  negative  aspects   

 

230 

G. Zurita and N. Baloian 

introduced  by  the  second  environment  which  were  not  present  in  the  first  one  and 
therefore were not checked. We will evaluate the usage of the new application at least 
some other 2 semesters in order to see if there are other aspects that should be positively 
or negatively evaluated. The fact that results obtained for the 3 semesters following 
 the  first  application  of  Google  Maps  to  support  the  learning  activity  being 
studied in this work were not significantly different from the first one may be an indicator 
that in this case, we may also have no dramatic variations, at least regarding the 
aspects touched by the questions Q1, Q2, and Q3.   

Keeping in mind that these first results should still be confirmed by further evaluation,
  we can say that according to the  numbers in Table 4  many of the  negative aspects 
of using Google Maps  combines  with Google Docs were solved. We can also 
say that we do not expect some negative aspects to come up again in future evaluations 
like duplicate contributions, idea proposals separated from the associated commands 
and ranking, deletion of ideas or comments by other students, lack of private 
workspaces, improvisation for supporting the decision-making process, and difficulties 
because ideas and the associated comments are separated. 

5 

Conclusions 

According  to  the  evaluation  using  Google  Map  “as  it  is”  we  concluded  that  it  has 
some very interesting technical features which enable collaboration among members 
of large groups but it lacked some other also very important in order to properly support 
the situated learning activity described in this paper. This analysis allowed us to 
derive  some  important  requirements  for  designing  a  more  suitable  application.  We 
also derived some additional  functional requirements  from the literature about decision 
making like: (1) Information gathering and brainstorming the ideas in a divergent 
mode.  (2)  Find  alternatives,  information  processing  and  comments  of  alternatives 
using  divergence  and  convergence  modes.  And  (3)  Make  choices  in  a  convergent 
mode,  described  in  section  2.3;  to  which  we  added  the  microblogging  services,  as 
described in section 2.2. 

  After  defining  the  design  requirements  we  built  a  geo-collaborative  application 
which  includes  microblogging  to  support  the  learning  activity.  After  one  semester 
evaluation we obtained positive but still not definitive results when comparing them 
with results obtained with the previous situation.   

Regarding the implementation of the system, it can be regarded as an integration of 
various types of cloud services into a single one. In fact, it makes use of functionalities 
provided by Goggle Maps and other cloud computing services and complements 
them  implementing  the  missing  functionalities.  Some  of  the  main  advantages  that 
authors  have  mentioned  about  using  Cloud  Computing  are  scalability,  ubiquity,  and 
reliability. These characteristics  match the requirements of  many learning scenarios, 
especially those in which students have to perform learning activities across various 
setting, inside and outside the classroom, collaboratively and individually working on 
generating and analyzing data, using different kind of computing devices supporting 
this work. We think that one of One of the main contributions of this work is to show 

 

 

Using Geo-collaboration and Microblogging to Support Learning 

231 

an example of the use of cloud computing for learning in a different way as reported 
by the literature: instead of using services as they are offered we propose to combine 
them in a new application which can be tailored to meet the requirement of a specific 
learning activity taking advantage of the characteristics of cloud computing and getting 
rid of at least some of its drawbacks, hopefully not introducing new ones (this has 
not been checked so far).   

It is clear that we need more evaluation instances of the new environment, which is 
currently being used by the students. This will allow us to make a more accurate analysis 
of what is working better and if there are some new problems introduced by the 
new setting that need to be tackled. 

References 

1.  Cai,  G.:  Extending  Distributed  GIS  to  Support  Geo-Collaborative  Crisis  Management. 

Progress in Human Geography 11(1), 4–14 (2001) 

2.  MacEachren, A., et al.: Supporting Map-Based Geocollaboration through Natural Interfaces 
to Large-Screen Displays. Cartographic Perspectives 54, 4–22 (2006) 

3.  MacEachren,  A.,  et  al.:  Visually  Enabled  Geocollaboration  to  Support  Data  Exploration 
and Decision Making. In: Proceedings of the 21st International Cartographic Conference, 
Durban, South Africa (2003) 

4.  Capata, A., Marella, A., Russo, R.: A Geo-Based Application for the Management of Mobile 
 Actors  During  Crisis  Situations.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  5th  International  ISCRAM 
Conference, Estados Unidos, Washington, DC (2008) 

5.  Schafer,  W.A.,  Ganoe,  C.H.,  Carroll,  J.M.:  Supporting  Community  Emergency  Management 
 Planning  through  a  Geocollaboration  Software  Architecture.  Computer  Supported 
Cooperative Work 16(4-5), 501–537 (2007) 

6.  Convertino, G., Zhao, D., Ganoe, C.H., Liang, J.: A Role-Based Multiple View Approach 
to  Distributed  Geo-Collaboration.  In:  Jacko,  J.A.  (ed.)  HCI  2007.  LNCS,  vol. 4553,  pp. 
561–570. Springer, Heidelberg (2007) 

7.  MacEachren, A., et al.: Enabling Collaborative Geoinformation Access and Decision Making 
through a Natural, Mulimodal Interface. International Journal of  Geographical Information 
Science 19, 293–317 (2005) 

8.  Silva, M.J., et al.: Children as authors of georeferenced multisensory information: towards 
the design of simulation and editing tools for an educational context. In: Proc. of the EDMEDIA 
2008, pp. 1578–1586 (2008) 

9.  Luo,  T.,  Gao,  F.:  Enhancing  Classroom  Learning  Experience  by  Providing  Structures to 

Microblogging-based Activities. Journal of Information Technology Education 11 (2012) 
10.  Zurita, G., Baloian, N.: Context, patterns and geo-collaboration to support situated learning.
 In: Bravo, J., López-de-Ipiña, D., Moya, F. (eds.) UCAmI 2012. LNCS, vol. 7656, pp. 
503–511. Springer, Heidelberg (2012) 

11.  Uden,  L.:  Activity  theory  for  designing  mobile  learning.  International  Journal of  Mobile 

Learning and Organisation 1(1), 81–102 (2007) 

12.  Drummond,  A.:  Situated  Learning  and  Assessment.  In:  Teaching  and  Learning  Symposium 
 2010,  UCD  School  of  Public  Health,  Physiotherapy  and  Population  Science:   
Wiscounsin (2010) 

13.  Lave,  J.,  Wenger,  E.:  Situated  Learning:  Legitimate  Periperal  Participation.  C.U.  Press, 

Cambridge (1990) 

 

232 

G. Zurita and N. Baloian 

14.  Zurita,  G.,  Baloian,  N.:  Collaborative  geo-referenced  knowledge  creation  for  designing 
and  planning.  In:  14th  International  Conference  on  Computer  Supported  Cooperative 
Work in Design (CSCWD). IEEE, China (2010) 

15.  Java, A., et al.: Why we twitter: understanding microblogging usage and communities. In: 
Proceedings of the 9th WebKDD and 1st SNA-KDD 2007 Workshop on Web Mining and 
Social Network Analysis 2007. ACM, San Jose (2007) 

16.  Grosseck, G.: To use or not to use web 2.0 in higher education? In: World Conference on 

Educational Sciences: New Trends and Issues in Educational Sciences (2009) 

17.  Carmona Altamirano, E., Nava Casarrubias, A., Mojica Benítez, R.A.: Microblogging en 

la Educación. Revista Digital Alternativa 6(20), 33–41 (2009) 

18.  Holotescu, C., Grosseck, G.: Learning to Microblog and Microblogging to Learn. A Case 
Study on Learning Scenarios in a Microblogging Context. In: Conference Proceedings of 
“eLearning and Software for Education” (2010) 

19.  Lin,  Y.-T.,  et  al.:  Location-Based  and  Knowledge-Oriented  Microblogging  for  Mobile 
Learning–Framework, Architecture, and System. In: Proceedings of the 2010 6th IEEE International 
 Conference  on  Wireless,  Mobile,  and  Ubiquitous  Technologies  in  Education 
2010. IEEE Computer Society (2010) 

20.  Dunlap, J.C., Lowenthal, P.R.: Tweeting the night away: Using Twitter to enhance social 

presence. Journal of Information Systems Education 20(2) (2009) 

21.  Shum, S.B., et al.: Using Social Network Analysis to Support Collective Decision-Making 
Process.  International  Journal  of  Decision  Support  System  Technology  (IJDSST) 3(2),   
15–31 (2011) 

22.  Turban, E., Liang, T.-P., Wu, S.P.: A framework for adopting collaboration 2.0 tools for 

virtual group decision making. Group Decision and Negotiation 20(2), 137–154 (2011) 

23.  Java, A., et al.: Why we twitter: understanding microblogging usage and communities. In: 
Proceedings of the 9th WebKDD and 1st SNA-KDD 2007 Workshop on Web Mining and 
Social Network Analysis. ACM (2007) 

24.  Zhao, D., Rosson, M.B.: How and why people Twitter: the role that micro-blogging plays 
in informal communication at work. In: Proceedings of the ACM 2009 International Conference 
on Supporting Group Work. ACM (2009) 

25.  Wong,  S.:  Preference-based  decision  making  for  cooperative  knowledge-based  systems. 

ACM Transactions on Information Systems 12(4), 407–435 (1994) 

26.  Kaner,  S.:  Facilitator’s  guide  to  participatory  decision-making.  New  Society  Publishers, 

Philadelphia (1996) 

27.  Briggs, R., Vreede, G., Nunamaker, J.: Collaboration Engineering with ThinkLets to Pursue 
Sustained Success with Group Support Systems. Journal of Management Information 
Systems 19(4), 31–64 (2003) 

28.  Antunes,  P.,  Sapateiro,  C.,  Zurita,  G.,  Baloian,  N.:  Integrating  spatial  data  and  decision 
models  in  an  E-planning  tool.  In:  Kolfschoten,  G.,  Herrmann,  T.,  Lukosch,  S.  (eds.) 
CRIWG 2010. LNCS, vol. 6257, pp. 97–112. Springer, Heidelberg (2010) 

29.  Holtzblatt, K., Wendell, J.B., Wood, S.: Rapid contextual design: a how-to guide to key 

techniques for user-centered design. Morgan Kaufmann (2004) 

30.  Van der Lelie, C.: The value of  storyboards in the product design process. Personal and 

Ubiquitous Computing 10(2-3), 159–162 (2006) 

31.  Antunes,  P.,  et  al.:  Analyzing  the  support  for  large  group  collaborations  using  Google 
Maps. In: 2011 15th International Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work 
in Design (CSCWD). IEEE (2011) 

32.  Miles, M., Huberman, A.: Qualitative Data Analysis. SAGE, Thousand Oaks (1994) 

 

