 

Multiple Views for Supporting Lifelong, Highly 

Contextual and Ubiquitous Social Learning 

Francisco Gutierrez1, Gustavo Zurita2, and Nelson Baloian1 

1 Computer Science Department, Universidad de Chile 
Av. Blanco Encalada 2120, 3rd Floor, Santiago, Chile 

2 Management Control and Information Systems Department, Universidad de Chile 

{Frgutier,nbaloian}@dcc.uchile.cl 

Abstract.  Current  social  networking  services  provide  ways  to  access  to  huge 
amounts  of  information  in  different  contexts.  However,  these  applications  are 
still  not  oriented  to  managing  knowledge  or  facilitating  learning  processes. 
Aiming to help users to access, create, validate and distribute their knowledge, 
we  propose  the  design  of  a  prototype  combining  multiple  views  to  support 
highly  contextual  learning.  This  prototype  consists  on  a  mobile  application 
based  on diverse  functionalities  and  interaction  mechanisms  currently  used  in 
social networking services. With this application, users will be able to register 
elements from their surrounding environment in form of micronotes, concepts, 
images, or other media. These knowledge blocks can be processed and rendered 
in different views (text, map, calendar, concept map, timeline), and augmented 
with  information  related  to  their  space,  time,  and  reference  contextual 
information. 

1 

Introduction 

its  evolution  has 

One  of  the  promises  of  the  ubiquitous  computing  paradigm  is  to  help  organize  and 
mediate  social  interactions  wherever  and  whenever  these  situations  might  occur.  In 
fact, 
improved  wireless 
telecommunications  capabilities,  open  networks,  continued  increases  in  computing 
power,  improved  battery  technology,  and  the  emergence  of  flexible  software 
architectures  [14].  However,  social 
technologies  are 
acknowledged, but are rarely considered carefully [8]. 

recently  been  accelerated  by 

implications  of 

these 

Typically,  people  when  are  faced  to  learning  situations  (either  in  formal  or 
informal  scenarios),  tend  to  involve  in  communities,  which  embody  beliefs  and 
behaviors  to  be  acquired  [17].  The  integration  of  one-to-one  computer-to-learner 
models  of  technology  enhanced  by  wireless  mobile  computing  and  position 
technologies may provide new ways to integrate indoor and outdoor learning [18]. 

Considering  the  current  popularity  of  social  software  applications  including 
communication and interactive tools for capturing, storing and processing multimedia 
and  localized  content  (e.g.  Facebook,  Twitter,  Foursquare,  Flickr,  etc.),  we  are 
interested on taking advantage of these interaction patterns for generating meaningful 

G. Urzaiz et al. (Eds.): UCAmI 2013, LNCS 8276, pp. 34–41, 2013. 
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2013 

 

Multiple Views for Supporting Lifelong, Highly Contextual and Ubiquitous 

35 

experiences in order to support life-long, contextual and social ubiquitous learning. In 
fact, none of these popular social software applications provide an appropriate context 
for  organizing  and  adapting  this  content  in  order  to  be  useful  in  either  formal  or 
informal  learning  scenarios.  In  other  words,  these  services  are  still  not  focused  to 
support  knowledge  management  (i.e.  knowledge  access,  creation,  validation  and 
distribution),  nor  facilitating  learning  processes.  Despite  the  fact  that  current  social 
applications facilitate the access to huge amounts of information (either structured or 
not), we still do not have mechanisms that allow users to process or navigate through 
their own knowledge acquired during their lives in formal or informal scenarios. 

 In this paper we propose the design of a prototype based on learning theories and 
patterns  of  social  networking  services,  which  provides  multiple  views  to  users  for 
facilitating the access, creation, validation and distribution of his/her knowledge, and 
therefore facilitating learning in different topics of his/her interest. This acquisition is 
adapted to the user context (which can be real/virtual, synchronous/asynchronous, co-
located/remote), to where this knowledge is acquired or used, lifelong, and supported 
by recent mobile technologies. The views offered by the application are automatically 
generated when registering personal notes, and they are augmented with information 
generated  by  other  users  (i.e.  in  a  social  context),  with  real-time  information  flows 
(e.g.  Twitter  trending  topics  or  formal  media  coverage),  and  with  bibliographical 
content taken from Wikipedia.  

2 

Related Work 

This section first introduces a set of models that aim to explain how people learn and 
in  which  scenarios.  We  then  present  usage  patterns  in  social  networking  services, 
indicating  why people use these software platforms in  general, and in the particular 
case of Facebook, Twitter, and Foursquare.   

Learning is a process that leads to change, which occurs as a result of experience 
and  increases  the  potential  for  improved  performance  and  future  learning  [1]. 
Moreover,  learning  is  omnipresent  in  our  daily  activities,  as  it  does  not  necessarily 
depend on instructors, books, self-study programs, or coaching [6]. There are several 
theories that aim to understand how people learn and which strategies can be used to 
enhance  knowledge  acquisition  in  different  scenarios.  In  this  subsection  we  will 
briefly  review  four  of  them:  (1)  seamless  learning,  (2)  situated  learning,  (3) 
rhizomatic learning, and (4) lifelong learning.  

According to Chan et al., the term seamless learning refers to activities marked by 
continuous  learning  experiences  across  different  contexts,  and  supported  by  mobile 
and ubiquitous technologies [4]. Seamless  learning environments bridge private and 
public  learning  spaces  where  learning  happens  as  both  individual  and  collective 
efforts  and  across  different  contexts.  There  is  a  need  on  enabling  learners  to  learn 
whenever  they  are  curious  and  seamlessly  switch  between  different  contexts. 
Therefore, there is a need to extend the social spaces in which learners interact [13]. 

Brown  et  al.  first  proposed  the  concept  of  situated  learning  [3],  in  which  they 
claim that meaningful learning will only take place if it is embedded in the social and 

 

36 

F. Gutierrez, G. Zurit

ta, and N. Baloian 

physical  context  within  w
learning as a model of learn
Seen as a model for the
the interconnectedness of i
from  different  starting  po
requires  the  creation  of  a 
construct knowledge and w
environmental  conditions
conversational  processes, 
unbounded personal learnin
Finally, lifelong learnin
knowledge  for  either  perso
longer be divided into a pla
apply  the  knowledge  acqu
ubiquitous technologies, sin
going  basis  from  our  daily
Figure  1  summarizes  the  m
bounded)  that  sustain  thes
bounded” to anything in pa
strongly boosted by “mobil
important aspect is the “con

which  it  will  be  used.  Lave  and  Wenger  define  situa
ning in a community of practice [11]. 
 construction of knowledge, rhizomatic processes sugg
ideas as well as boundless exploration across many fro
oints.  For  the  educator,  supporting  rhizomatic  learn
context  within  which  members  of  a  learning  commun
which can be reshaped in a dynamic manner in response
.  The 
learning  experience  may  build  on  soc
as  well  as  personal  knowledge  creation,  linked  i
ng networks that merge formal and informal media [5]. 
ng is the ongoing, voluntary, and self-motivated pursui
onal  or  professional  reasons.  Therefore,  learning  can
ace and time to acquire knowledge and a place and time
uired  [7].  For  this  reason,  learning  can  be  supported 
nce it can be seen as something that takes place on an 
y  interactions  with  others  and  with  the  world  around 
main  characteristics  (context,  continuity,  mobility  and 
e  four  learning  theories:  lifelong  learning  theory  is  “
articular, has a constant “continuity” in its process, and
ity”. For both situated learning and rhizomatic theories
ntext” in which learning situations occur. 

ated 

gest 
onts 
ning 
nity 
e to 
cial, 
into 

t of 
n  no 
e to 
  by 
onus.
 
not 
“not 
d is 
, an 

 
Main concepts derived from learning theories 

Fig. 1. M

Maslow’s hierarchy of n
the  popularity  of  this  mod
networking services show t
connection and how social m
Brandtzaeg  and  Heim  c
social  networking  services
seeking  new  relations  and 
close friends and acquaintan
With  the  uprising  popu
studied the main uses of the
events or about what peopl
share  useful  information,  a

needs model describes human motivation. However, desp
del,  insights  from  the  use  and  adoption  of  current  so
that this model fails at considering current trends of so
media impacts over the original pyramid [16]. 
conducted  a  survey  in  order  to  find  out  why  people 
.  Among  the  stated  reasons,  the  most  important  are: 
meeting  new  people;  (2)  maintaining  contacts  with  b
nces; and (3) sharing experiences, and commenting [2]. 
larity  of  Twitter  and  microblogging  services,  Java  et
ese platforms. They found out these are: talk about curr
e are currently doing, reply to other users’ short messag
and  report  news  [9].  Regarding  the  reasons  that  motiv

use 
(1) 
both 

t  al. 
rent 
ges, 
vate 

pite 
cial 
cial 

 

 

Multiple Views for 

Supporting Lifelong, Highly Contextual and Ubiquitous 

37 

users  to  become  members
model  that  suggests  that 
presentation  [15].  Joinson 
perform:  contact  friends 
communicate,  and  share  a
study  to  understand  how 
Foursquare),  as  well  as  ho
privacy concerns have not k

  and  participate  in  Facebook.  Nadkarni  et  al.  propos
its  users  have  two  main  needs:  belonging  and  s
also  studied  the  different  activities  that  Facebook  us
and  acquaintances,  get  to  virtually  know  new  peop
and  comment  pictures  [10].  Lindqvist  et  al.  conducte
and  why  people  use  location-sharing  applications  (
ow  they  manage  their  privacy  [12].  They  found  out  t
kept users from adopting these services.  

se  a 
selfsers 

ple, 
ed  a 
(e.g. 
that 

3 

Prototype Desig

gn for Supporting Ubiquitous Social Learnin

ng 

The prototype runs over a 
taking on the go. As of the
and  an  integration  with  s
connections. Figure 2 gives

mobile telephone or tablet, since it gives support to  n
 software platform, it relays on a client-server architect
social  networking  services  for  giving  support  to  so
s an overview of the proposed architecture. 

note 
ture 
ocial 

Fig. 2

2. Proposed architecture of the prototype 

 

Users can interact in two
mobile interface to register
and (B) generate a view wi
with  the  relevant  notes  re
contextualized summaries t
elements from Wikipedia. T
relevant to them and highly
notes,  thus  allowing  the 
knowledge,  and  facilitating
gives an overview of the u
two  main  ways  users  can 
registering a note in the fie
automatically-generated  vie
where a view of Figure 4 c
message,  record  an  audio 
camera, tag a location, or ta
note (i.e. personal, public un

o ways with the application: (A) taking a note, by using 
r text, pictures, audio, video, or geographical coordina
ith the information stored in his/her profile, augmentin
egistered  by  his/her  friends  (taken  from  Facebook), 
taken from what is trending in Twitter and bibliograph
That way, users can benefit from a personalized view tha
y contextual. Users can also navigate through their differ
access,  creation,  validation  and  distribution  of  his/
g  learning  in  different  topics  of  his/her  interest.  Figur
user interface design for the proposed prototype. There 
interact  with  the  prototype,  as  shown  in  Figure  3: 
eld (see the screenshot on the left), and (B) consulting
ew  from  existing  notes  (see  the  screenshot  on  the  rig
can be displayed). In the first case, users can either typ
or  video  file,  take  a  picture  with  the  telephone  buil
ag other users. It is also possible to set the visibility of e
nder a defined perimeter, or public to all users). 

the 
ates; 
ng it 
and 
hical 
at is 
rent 
/her 
re  3 
are 
(A) 
g an 
ght, 
pe a 
lt-in 
each 

 

38 

F. Gutierrez, G. Zurit

ta, and N. Baloian 

A 

BB

Fig. 3. Us

ser interface design of the proposed prototype 

 

The second interface off
of  notes  handled  by  the 
information regarding the u
social interaction value whe
social interaction responds 
services: (1) looking for and
interests, and (3) being able
 

fers five ways to display the information related to the
user.  Moreover,  the  views  are  rendered  with  dynam
users’ friends and declared acquaintances, thus enhancin
en interacting with the registered and visualized notes. T
to the typical uses that are observed in social network
d sharing information, (2) meeting new people with sim
e to share experiences and discuss with others. 

e set 
mic 
ng a 
This 
king 
milar 

Fig. 4. Sup

pported views for displaying augmented notes 

 

Regarding  the  views  of
registered  in  the  different 
serving  as  a  bibliographi
management  of  their  know
their acquired knowledge o
how the user is actually int
using cognitive profiling. F
The  supported  views  in
learning  theories  reviewed
continuity,  mobility,  and 
enhancing  the  context  dim
concept  map,  and  feed),  su
processing,  validation  and 
the  support  of  mobile  devi
interested in; i.e., not bound

f  the  second  interface,  they  aim  to  display  the  cont
notes,  and  providing  an  additional  layer  of  informat
cal  and  social  context.  That  way,  users  can  ease 
wledge  by  accessing,  creating,  validating,  and  distribut
over time and space. The display of the views is adapted
teracting with the application, by processing his/her ha
igure 4 shows an overview of the different views. 
tegrate  the  main  characteristics  that  are  derived  from 
d  in  section  2.1  and  summarized  in  Figure  1:  cont
not  bounded.  Therefore,  there  is  a  particular  stress
mension  in  each  view  proposed  (calendar,  map,  timel
upporting  mobility  and  continuity  in  the  note  acquisiti
distribution  of  information,  anytime  and  anywhere,  w
ices.  We  expect  that  users  learn  about  any  topic  they 
ded. The specific elements covered in each view are: 

tent 
tion 
the 
ting 
d to 
abits 

the 
text, 
s  in 
ine, 
ion, 
with 
are 

 

 

Multiple Views for Supporting Lifelong, Highly Contextual and Ubiquitous 

39 

•  Calendar view: For specifying the temporal context in which users register their 

notes, and how these are related between them as events in specific dates; 

•  Map  view:  For  specifying  the  geographical  context  of  the  different  notes, 

represented with a pin over a map; 

•  Timeline: For grouping in time different notes according to the temporal context in 
which they were registered with blocks of events in two dimensions: one related to 
the  notes  generated  by  the  user  at  a  specific  time,  and  another  that  includes 
contextual information to the elements described in the user timeline; 

•  Concept map: For displaying a broad view of how the information registered in 
the different notes is related to the others by joining concepts, notes, and blocks of 
external  information,  providing  a  scenario  for  establishing  new  relations  among 
people who want to exchange notes, concepts, or information in general; and 

•  Feed: For showing a full text-based list of the notes registered by a user. 

4 

Prototype Evaluation 

In order to get a first insight on user’s expectations and needs with the proposal, we 
carried out a paper prototyping evaluation with a group of 8 end users (5 men and 3 
women, aged between 20 and 32 years old).  All of these  evaluators stated they  use 
quite  often  social  mobile  applications.  We  used  this  technique  because  it  is  quite 
useful when evaluating early prototypes, as users feel more comfortable being critical 
because the prototype is typically not developed at this stage. We printed out a highresolution 
 set  of  mock-ups  to  compensate  for  the  poorer  quality  of  printing,  and  to 
make it easier for the observer to see what the users were pointing at. The evaluation 
was conducted by showing the main user interface to each tester, and we asked them 
to first comment on their general impression, then to point to any element that they 
thought they could interact with and tell us what they expected would happen.  

This simple method provided us with feedback indicating that the designed views 
are  pertinent  when  trying  to  access  the  registered  notes  in  different  contexts. 
However, it was somewhat difficult for the evaluators to understand at a first glance 
why  the  proposal  could  be  useful  in  a  real  case  scenario  (e.g.  when  going  to  a 
museum,  or  walking  along  a  street,  or  traveling  in  any  kind  of  vehicle,  etc.).  This 
indicates that the interaction design of our prototype needs to be enhanced, and that 
further  evaluation  in  the  field  with  end  users  is  required  to  assess  the  perceived 
usefulness  and  perceived  ease  of  use  of  the  prototype  in  real  use-scenarios.  At  a 
second stage, we carried out a survey to assess the perceived usefulness of each one 
of the views specified in the design of the prototype. The evaluators had to fill a 5point 
Likert scale. We also added an open space at the end of the survey for general 
comments and suggestions. Figure 5 shows the median value given by the evaluators 
for the perceived usefulness of each view. 

Regarding  the perception of the different  views embedded in  the application, the 
group of users considered the map view and the timeline as the most useful. In fact, 
open  comments  showed  that  the  timeline  view  indicated  not  only  which  notes  are 
relevant,  but  also  this  view  is  useful  for  remembering  and  putting  in  context  the 

 

40 

F. Gutierrez, G. Zurit

ta, and N. Baloian 

different notes when they w
usage is rather limited sinc
feed view (i.e. just a list of 
median  value  of  3  out  of  5
might have found in differe

were registered. Concerning the calendar view, however
e it is not as expressive as the other proposed views.  T
f all the registered notes in text-form) was evaluated wit
5.  This  result  can  be  linked  to  the  added  value  that  us
ent ways of visualizing the same set of notes.  

, its 
The 
th a 
sers 

 

Fig. 5. Survey r

results: perceived usefulness of the proposed views 

 

Finally, concerning the m
in Figure 1, we can state th
when  defining  the  contextu
from the surrounding envir
previous registered notes, th

main concepts derived from the learning theories presen
hat mobility and continuity are indeed important eleme
ualized  views.  In  fact,  by  acquiring  pieces  of  knowle
onment, the user will be able to put in context his/her o
hus being able to organize his/her knowledge. 

nted 
ents 
edge 
own 

5 

Conclusions and

d Future Work 

the design of a prototype based on learning theories, wh
o  users  for  facilitating  the  access,  creation,  validation 
wledge, and therefore facilitating learning in different top
nteract with the application in two ways: (1) by register
text, pictures, audio, video, and geographical coordina
ws  that  are  automatically  generated  with  the  registe
re  augmented  with  information  generated  by  other  us
n  flows,  and  with  bibliographical  content  taken  fr
knowledge  is  adapted  to  the  user  context  (real/virt
, co-located/remote), to  where this knowledge is acqui
pported by recent technologies. 

hich 
and 
pics 
ring 
ates; 
ered 
sers, 
rom 
tual, 
ired 

early  to  strongly  conclude  about  the  pertinence  of 
evaluation  of  the  prototype  proved  us  right  that  there  i
tion  that  integrates  social  elements  and  allows  knowle
n  the  specific  case  of  the  proposed  prototype,  it  is 
eraction design elements, for example by including spe
ynthesis in order to allow audio-based input/outputs. 

our 
is  a 
dge 
still 
eech 

In this paper we proposed t
provides  multiple  views  to
distribution of his/her know
of his/her interest. Users in
personal notes in form of t
and  (2),  by  accessing  vie
personal  notes,  and  they  ar
with  real-time  information
Wikipedia.  The  registered 
synchronous/asynchronous,
or used, is lifelong, and sup
Even  if  it  is  still  quite 
proposal,  a  first  end-user  e
need  for  a  mobile  applicat
management.  However,  in
needed to enhance the inte
recognition and/or speech s

 

 

Multiple Views for Supporting Lifelong, Highly Contextual and Ubiquitous 

41 

References 

1.  Ambrose, S.A., Bridges, M.W., DiPietro, M., Lovett, M.C., Norman, M.K.: How Learning 

Works. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco (2010) 

2.  Brandtzaeg,  P.B.,  Heim,  J.:  Why  People  Use  Social  Networking  Sites.  In:  Ozok,  A.A., 
Zaphiris,  P.  (eds.)  OCSC  2009.  LNCS,  vol. 5621,  pp.  143–152.  Springer,  Heidelberg 
(2009) 

3.  Brown,  J.S.,  Collins,  A.,  Duguid,  P.:  Situated  Cognition  and  the  Culture  of  Learning. 

Educational Researcher 18(1), 32–42 (1989) 

4.  Chan,  T.-W.,  Roschelle,  J.,  His,  S.,  Kinshuk,  S.M.,  et  al.:  One-to-One  TechnologyEnhanced 
 Learning:  An  Opportunity  for  Global  Research  Collaboration.  Research  and 
Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning 1(1), 3–29 (2006) 

5.  Cormier,  D.:  Rhizomatic  Education:  Community  as  Curriculum.  Journal  of  Online 

Education 4(5) (2008) 

6.  Cross, J.: Informal Learning: Rediscovering the Natural Pathways that Inspire Innovation 

and Performance. Pfeiffer, San Francisco (2006) 

7.  Fischer,  G.:  Lifelong  Learning  –  More  than  Training.  Journal  of  Interactive  Learning 

Research 11(3/4), 265–294 (2000) 

8.  Grudin,  J.:  Group  Dynamics  and  Ubiquitous  Computing.  Communications  of  the 

ACM 45(12), 74–78 (2002) 

9.  Java, A., Song, X., Finin, T., Tseng, B.: Why We Twitter: Understanding Microblogging 
Usage  and  Communities.  In:  Zhang,  H.,  Spiliopoulou,  M.,  Mobasher,  B.,  Giles,  C.L., 
McCallum,  A.,  Nasraoui,  O.,  Srivastava,  J.,  Yen,  J.  (eds.)  WebKDD  2007.  LNCS, 
vol. 5439, pp. 118–138. Springer, Heidelberg (2009) 

10.  Joinson,  A.N.:  ‘Looking  At’,  ‘Looking  Up’ or  ‘Keeping  Up’  With People?  Motives  and 
Uses of Facebook. In: Proceedings of the 26th SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI 2008), Florence, Italy (2008) 

11.  Lave,  J.,  Wenger,  E.:  Situated  Learning:  Legitimate  Peripheral  Participation.  Cambridge 

University Press, Cambridge (1991) 

12.  Lindqvist,  J.,  Cranshaw,  J.,  Wiese,  J.,  Hong,  J.,  Zimmerman,  J.:  I’m  the  Mayor  of  my 
House:  Examining  Why  People  Use  Foursquare  –  A  Social-Driven  Location  Sharing 
Application.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  29th  SIGCHI  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in 
Computing Systems (CHI 2011), Vancouver, Canada (2011) 

13.  Looi, C.K., Seow, P., Zhang, B., So, H.J., Chen, W.-L., Wong, L.H.: Leveraging Mobile 
Technology  for  Sustainable  Seamless  Learning:  A  Research  Agenda.  British  Journal  of 
Educational Technology 41(2), 154–169 (2010) 

14.  Lyytinen, K., Yoo, Y.: Issues and Challenges in Ubiquitous Computing. Communications 

of the ACM 45(12), 63–65 (2002) 

15.  Nadkarni, A., Hofmann, S.G.: Why do People Use Facebook? Personality and Individual 

Differences 52(3), 243–249 (2012) 

16.  Rutledge, P.: Social Networks: What Maslow Misses,  

http://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/positively-
media/201111/social-networks-what-maslow-misses-0 
(retrieved, last visited May 23, 2013) 

17.  Wenger,  E.:  Communities  of  Practice  and  Social  Learning  Systems.  Organization 7(2), 

225–246 (2000) 

18.  Zurita,  G.,  Baloian,  N.:  Context,  Patterns  and  Geo-collaboration  to  Support  Situated 
Learning.  In:  Bravo,  J.,  López-de-Ipiña,  D.,  Moya,  F.  (eds.)  UCAmI  2012.  LNCS, 
vol. 7656, pp. 503–511. Springer, Heidelberg (2012) 

 

