Interactive Learning Environments

ISSN: 1049-4820 (Print) 1744-5191 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/nile20

Learning about earthquakes: getting serious about
authenticity in computer-supported learning

Nelson Baloian , Jose A. Pino & Jens Hardings

To cite this article: Nelson Baloian , Jose A. Pino & Jens Hardings (2011) Learning about
earthquakes: getting serious about authenticity in computer-supported learning, Interactive
Learning Environments, 19:3, 285-302, DOI: 10.1080/10494820903032004
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/10494820903032004

Published online: 23 Jul 2009.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 158

Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=nile20

Interactive Learning Environments
Vol. 19, No. 3, June 2011, 285–302

Learning about earthquakes: getting serious about authenticity in
computer-supported learning

Nelson Baloiana*, Jose A. Pinoa and Jens Hardingsb

aDepartment of Computer Science, University of Chile, Av. Blanco Encalada 2120, P. 3,
Santiago, Chile; bDepto. Ciencia de la Computacio´n, P. Universidad Cato´lica de Chile, Casilla
306, Santiago, Chile

(Received 4 March 2008; ﬁnal version received 23 March 2009)

the requirements

The discovery or re-construction of scientiﬁc explanations and understanding
based on experience is a complex process, for which school learning often uses
shortcuts. On the basis of the example of analyzing real seismic measurements, we
propose a computer-facilitated collaborative learning scenario which meets many
of
for authentic learning, knowledge construction, and
collaboration. The implementation of the learning environment called SeisModes
is based on a general platform for supporting collaborative modeling activities.
SeisModes provides a tool
to allow students collaboratively learn about
earthquakes and thus reduce the fears they might have concerning them. First
formal evaluations showed the approach motivates students.

Keywords: collaborative learning; authentic activities; earthquakes preparedness;
science education; knowledge modeling

1.

Introduction

(1978)

socio-cultural

theory promotes

the importance of

Vygotsky’s
social
interaction and the use of artifacts for knowledge acquisition. Bellamy (1996)
proposed three principles for the design of educational environments based on
Vygotsky’s works. First, the notion of authentic activities proposes the modeling of
activities and tools derived from professional practices. Second, ‘construction’ refers
to learners creating and sharing artifacts within their community. Third, educational
environments should be designed to involve a close collaboration among learners
and their peers as well as among students and experts.

However, activity–theoretic approaches (e.g. Bertelsen & Bodker, 2003) usually
remain general when applied to the design of tasks and artifacts. Especially the
notion of authenticity widely spread in the current literature on e-learning remains a
blurry demand rather than a well-deﬁned concept. This article presents a concrete
implementation of the activity–theoretic approach and it speciﬁes the requirements
for a digital artifact supporting this approach. The subject to be learned is the
earthquake phenomenon and the developed system implements an environment

*Corresponding author. Email: nbaloian@gmail.com

ISSN 1049-4820 print/ISSN 1744-5191 online
Ó 2011 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/10494820903032004
http://www.informaworld.com

286

N. Baloian et al.

where students can retrieve real data from seismographs and compute interesting
statistics.

Reviewing educational theory and research on authentic activities and online
learning, Reeves, Herrington, and Oliver (2002) extracted 10 characteristics from
authentic activities. Some of these features are: authentic activities are supposed to
have real-world relevance and create valuable products. The activities involve illdeﬁned,
 complex tasks to be examined from various perspectives, using a variety of
resources and allowing a diversity of outcomes. They provide opportunities for
collaboration and reﬂection and they can be applied across several subject areas.

Reeves et al.’s list of characteristics is not a ﬁnal and universal deﬁnition of
authenticity. Reeves et al. (2002) rather referred to the need to deﬁne what is meant
by authenticity and which requirements for learning can be derived from each
deﬁnition. We take into account activity theory by starting from a problem-space
that motivates activities. In particular, we specify/substitute authenticity by realworld 
problems,
instead of claiming vague
authenticity, we propose to design learning environments for the accomplishment
of goals and tasks, derived from real-world problems requiring collaboration.

tasks, and collaboration. Thus,

These real-world or practical problems and goals exist independently and before
designing the speciﬁc learning setting. Therefore, there are solutions used by
professionals that can provide a frame for the students’ learning activities. The
conceptual gap between learning and professional worlds (Quintana, Carra, Krajcik,
& Soloway, 2001) may be ﬁlled in this way. This is also consistent with the problembased 
approach to learning (Reinmann-Rothmeier & Mandl, 2001). Being coherent
with Vygotsky’s works, practitioners should ideally provide scaﬀolding support to
learners’ proximal development. On their side, students should be motivated to
participate in communities of practice in order to eventually contribute valuable
input and proposals for solutions. A seamless integration of learning activities with
assessment resembles real-world processes and prevents the setting from imposing a
purely artiﬁcial activity structure.

It must be emphasized that the need for collaboration should not be unnaturally
forced on the community of learners by the system but grounded in the nature of the
task. The learners will appreciate the value of collaboration only if it is clearly
needed to accomplish the task or achieve better results than alone: they will seriously
engage in collaborative activities such as sharing information, discussing partial
research results, and produce shared decisions and synthetic solutions.

Understanding and appreciating the need for collaboration may be a signiﬁcant

part of the learning process.

The rest of the article is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the general
domain of application in which the learning strategy will be implemented. Section 3
includes a bibliographic review of the subject. The speciﬁc scenario of experimentation 
is described in section 4. Section 5 describes the educational approach for this
scenario. Section 6 discusses how this approach ﬁts Bellamy’s authenticity principles.
Section 7 presents some experimental data and Section 8 concludes the article.

2. Distributed seismography

A real-world problem deals with the natural phenomenon of earthquakes
experienced by students in several parts of the world. Inhabitants of those regions
are suddenly subject to the shaking of the earth’s surface without being able to

Interactive Learning Environments

287

actively relate to it. On the other hand, results from seismographic research are used
to analyze seismic processes, to evaluate and avoid risks for speciﬁc regions and
locations and somehow to understand the uncontrollable behavior of nature.

The gap between scientiﬁc research of earthquakes and the experience of people
having just had an earthquake is an opportunity to create a collaborative learning
activity. Students may use specially adapted versions of professional tools and
practices for remote measurement and analysis. Such tools and practices will also
allow applying and developing mathematics and physical operations. A collaborative
eﬀort is needed to integrate temporal-spatial measures into shared computations
and the creation of seismic maps. Besides, persisting complexities and fuzziness in
the nature and instruments of measurement as well as dispute on theoretical
approaches aﬀord participants to specify and argue about
their sometimes
conﬂicting research decisions and conclusions. Students move from a peripheral
participation to the epicenter of the activity by facing the challenges of real
practitioners.

The environment we are presenting in this work consists of a seismograph
network, a computer network that allows the sharing of the generated data and the
tools enabling students and teacher to process this information. The main student
activities we want to support are:

. Learning by engaging in seismographic research contents, methods, and tools.
. Developing and applying concepts and methods of mathematics and physics.
. Discovering the potential of collaboration.
. Reﬂecting upon the impact of scientiﬁc research on human lives.

The following paradigms and design principles were applied to support these
learning goals. They also provide a computation-augmented environment for
collaborative learning about real-world problems, tasks, and solutions:

. Orientation on expert workﬂow, activity structures, and tools.
. Visualization that supports concept understanding and the (re-)creation of
common grounds. In particular, scientiﬁc visualization for data analysis allows
comparably easy access to and direct investigation of otherwise complex
domains. From a learners’ point of view, it also provides a means for active,
open-ended exploration of scientiﬁc questions and demonstration of research
results, a basis for collaborative exchange and discussion and a common
ground with scientists (Edelson, Gordin, & Pea, 1999).

. Integration of online and oﬄine, individual and collaborative, in-class and

distributed activities.
. Flexibility to adapt

the environment

to the local conditions (students’

background and skills).

3. Related work

A review is made below of previous research on authentic activities and the use of
seismographs in schools. Although there are several initiatives aimed at providing
students with hands-on experience with seismographic data, they diﬀer from our
approach in the way students process the data in order to achieve signiﬁcant
learning.

288

N. Baloian et al.

3.1.

Implementation of authentic activities

The CoVis Project (Edelson, 1998) focusing on science – ‘Learning through
Collaborative Visualization’ – resembles authentic practices of science. It provides a
variety of collaboration and communication tools and it tries to embed the use of
technology in the development of new curricula and pedagogical approaches. It
focuses on a project-enhanced science learning pedagogy, scientiﬁc visualization
tools for open ended inquiry, and networked environments for communication and
collaboration.

For Edelson, authenticity refers to a learning situation reﬂecting the context of
use. He thus characterizes science practice with its attitudes of uncertainty and
commitment, discipline-speciﬁc tools and techniques, and social
interaction.
Uncertainty refers to the continual re-examination of techniques and results in the
pursuit of unanswered questions. Commitment indicates that the inquiry has
meaningful ramiﬁcations within the scientists’ value system – or the students’ one.
The use of historically reﬁned tools and techniques also provides a shared context
easing communication. Social
interaction stresses that scientiﬁc work exceeds
investigation by including sharing results, concerns, and questions among a
community of scientists.
‘A vision of learning that integrates these features of
scientiﬁc practice has students investigating open questions about which they are
genuinely concerned, using methods that parallel those of scientists. Throughout the
process, they are engaged in active interchange with others who share their interest’
(Edelson, 1998).

Van Joolingen (2000) has suggested a synthesis between discovery learning in
science and collaborative learning, both supported by computational tools. Indeed,
there are several collaborative activities in discovery learning and collaborative
modeling. Bollen, Hoppe, Milrad, and Pinkwart (2002) have identiﬁed the following
aspects of computer support in collaborative modeling:

. Several students can share a running model by synchronizing their simulation

environments.

. The actual model building process can be a collaborative activity using a

modeling language and annotations in shared workspaces.

. Simulations are analyzed to generate hypotheses about the global behavior of
systems. Free-hand sketches as well as argumentation graphs and mathematical 
tools are useful to do this analysis in group work.

. Data can be collected in a distributed working mode with various parameters.

Shared workspaces allow for gathering data from diﬀerent groups.

. Group work can be supervised by sharing the environment with a distant tutor.

The ‘CoolModes’ platform (Pinkwart, Hoppe, & Gaßner, 2001) developed by the
COLLIDE group (COLLIDE, 2008) supports these activities by providing a
uniform shared workspace environment, which allows for constructing and running
models with various formal representations (Petri nets, mathematical graphs, etc.). It
also supports semi-formal argumentation graphs and hand-written annotations. The
work reported in this article has been inspired by these developments. In fact, the
CoolModes platform was extended in order to allow modeling of the workﬂow
needed to analyze the data generated by the seismographs, as it will be explained in
detail in section 5.

Interactive Learning Environments

289

3.2. Seismographs at schools

Acknowledging the motivation that a seismograph can produce in schoolchildren,
many initiatives have been established to provide seismographs to schools for
supporting earthquakes learning. The Boston College Educational Seismology
Project ﬁrst installed a seismograph at the Garﬁeld School for fourthand 
ﬁfth-grade
schoolchildren where they can monitor and see the seismogram generated by
earthquakes all over the world. They report an increased students’ motivation to
understand and learn about these phenomena (BostonCollege, 2008).

As part of the Seismographs in Schools Program, the Incorporated Research
for Seismology organization (IRIS, 2007) provides educational
Institutions
seismographs and related materials to selected teachers for use in the classroom.
The seismographs are used in the laboratory to teach about seismic waves,
earthquakes, how a seismograph works, and data collection principles. They claim
the use of the seismograph by teachers and students and recording actual data from
local and signiﬁcant events from around the world can stimulate interest and
motivation to further learning on seismology and Earth science. Also in the USA,
the Educational Seismology Network (USESN, 2008) promotes the use of
seismographs and seismic data for science education. In Germany, a workshop
about constructing and using home-made seismographs was organized by motivated
students at the Monschau St.-Michael High School. Similar initiatives have been
reported from other schools in Germany (Philipsburg, Aachen, Staufen), Italy
(Napoli), Norway, and Portugal.

These projects, at least formally, do not claim to promote and put in practice a
certain educational methodology. They seem to concentrate more on the
installation of seismographs, distribution of software for visualizing the waves,
and complementary learning material
for motivating the study rather than
proposing a novel didactic process grounded in the learning sciences. An
interesting exception to this is roomquake (Moher, Hussain, Halter, & Kilb,
2005), which is based on a principle its authors call Embedded Phenomena. In this
project, children simulate an earthquake occurring in the classroom. Handheld
computers simulate the waves recorded by a sensor for a certain earthquake whose
epicenter is somewhere inside the classroom. Student teams read and interpret the
seismogram waveforms and determine the roomquake magnitude and distance of
the epicenter of the quake from each of the stations. They do this with the help of
a dry-line (calibrated reel of twine) anchored at each of the seismographic stations.
Pulling out the corresponding length of twine, students sweep out arcs until they
literally collide with one another, physically enacting a mathematical triangulation
of the epicenter.

By contrast, the approach presented in this article starts from and it is deeply
rooted in learning theories and methodologies. At the same time, it re-creates the real
professionals’ actual working environment, hiding the advanced details which are
irrelevant to learn the intuitive concepts.

4. A sensors network for Chilean schools

Chile is a seismic country: several large earthquakes have occurred in this country
during the last century (notably, in 1906, 1939, and 1960). It is, therefore, a suitable
scenario for distributed seismography, as mentioned in section 2.

290

N. Baloian et al.

Figure 1. The network of seismic sensors.

A set of eight seismographic sensors were installed in some Santiago high schools
and connected to computers (Figure 1, dark colored triangles). Students interested in
learning about geophysics and seismic phenomena were responsible for maintaining
and taking care of the sensor and the computer at each school.

It is possible to compute interesting characteristics of an earthquake using the
data gathered by the sensors, e.g. the location of its epicenter and its magnitude. This
requires the application of knowledge about how waves propagate in the ground and
some knowledge about geometry. In particular, computation of the epicenter is
based on the diﬀerent propagation speeds of the primary and secondary waves. The
computation is based on intuitive principles. However, the actual computing is a
tedious and time-consuming procedure, especially if accurate results are to be
obtained . There is a highly sophisticated software developed for professionals, e.g.
SEISAN (2008), which allow to quickly obtain accurate results for the computations
with just a few mouse clicks. They are designed for the expert geophysicists and they
do not stress the awareness of the background necessary for the calculations,
encapsulating, and thus hiding the principles in which they are based, which are
supposed to be known by the user.

Although the presence of a seismograph was shown to be a very motivating
element for students in order to enhance their interest for studying earthquake
phenomena, the geographical distribution of them was not good enough to have
data for making the triangulation needed to calculate the epicenter and magnitude.
Consequently, we arranged that the students could also get access to data sets
generated by seismographs belonging to the Chilean National Seismological Service,
which runs a large network of them, conveniently distributed in order to obtain
quality data for computing the parameters of an earthquake (Figure 1, light colored
triangles). We obtained access to the data of 11 seismographs located in central
Chile. The data produced by each of these seismographs are stored in a dedicated
server whenever a tremor occurred which surpasses a certain threshold, in order to
avoid recording the noise produced by events other than real earthquakes. There is
an average of 4 – 6 of such events in normal days in this area. Although 90% of them
are not perceived by people, 30% of the recorded events produce data of enough

Interactive Learning Environments

291

quality for doing the calculations. A server for the project was set up to provide the
following functionalities:

. Download the seismological data from the Seismological Service server once a
day using FTP protocol. This means about 4–6 data ﬁles will be downloaded,
according to the number of events recorded during the previous day.

. Allow client programs using Web Services to retrieve these data which is useful

for computing the characteristics of the earthquakes that generated them.

. Allow students in schools having a seismograph to upload data to share it with

other schools.

Figure 2 shows the architecture that allows the retrieval and sharing of data for
the project: (1) represents the generation of data at the professional seismographs.
The data are transmitted via ftp to the server of the Seismological Service (2). The
data are then downloaded by the project server also via ftp (3), which is contacted by
the students (4) using the Web Service protocol. Students from schools having a
seismograph (5) upload their data to the project server and download the data from
the professional seismographs using the Web Service protocol.

5. Challenge-based learning in a seismic scenario

Project-based and problem-based activities are usually focused on a driving question
or problem (Jonassen & Murphy, 1999). In what we call challenge-based learning
(CBL) (Baloian, Hoeksema, Milrad, & Hoppe, 2006), the question or problem is

Figure 2. Data ﬂow from its generation to the processing.

292

N. Baloian et al.

replaced by a challenge. This challenge may be initiated either by the teacher or a
student group. The challenges to be solved might include ways to develop, design,
and implement solutions for problems related to scientiﬁc phenomena. A meaningful
learning activity consistent with CBL is to present learners with a challenge scenario
and to ask them to think about a number of possible solutions using a variety of
interactive tools.

Several ‘Digital Experimentation Toolkits’ (DExTs) have been developed within
the COLDEX (2008) project to support educational classroom scenarios according
to the CBL approach. A DExT includes experimental
instructions, scientiﬁc
background information, modeling and simulation tools, access to real scientiﬁc
data, and the formulation of initial challenges providing an open-ended learning
environment that stimulates learners to identify and solve a challenge according to
Authentic Learning and CBL. These DExTs are intended to be handed out to
schools to be used in, but not only, normal lessons. They provide innovative use of
interactive media to enrich the curricula. Teachers should be enabled to integrate
these new resources easily in their lessons. As only a few teachers have time to spend
on courses or time-consuming studies for ‘learning’ to use these toolkits, they are
mostly self-describing and trouble-free. DExTs are not to be seen as expert systems
which present themselves as authoritative and deﬁnitive.

Therefore, setting the network of sensors and servers is only part of the work: a
DExT for learning the geophysics of the earthquakes should be built. With this aim,
we developed a tool which enables students to download seismological data from the
project server. The tool also assists the students to perform the computations to
determine the distance to the epicenter, magnitude of the earthquake, and other
interesting derived data. The tedious but necessary computational work is
encapsulated,
in order to drive the students’ whole attention to learning the
important concepts behind the calculations. The students use a program
implementing the following functionalities:

. Retrieve data from the local seismograph
. Publish the local data on the common server
. Download data from remotely located seismographs
. Provide a framework where students can do their computations and graphic

operations to ﬁnd the epicenter

. Provide a framework to compare and analyze the results obtained by other

groups

. Provide a discussion framework

The tool called SeisModes was developed especially for this work on top of the
CoolModes modeling tool (Pinkwart, 2003). This tool is then the DExT we planned
to develop for learning earthquakes geophysics. On an abstract level, CoolModes
can be seen as a graph editor, which allows the inclusion of various ‘palettes’ deﬁning
a group of speciﬁc nodes and arcs with particular functionalities in order to model a
certain system. For example, palettes exist for modeling Petri nets, mathematical
graphs (Mu¨ ller, Mu¨ hlenbrock, & Pinkwart, 2004), calculating elevations on the
moon (Hoeksema & Hoppe, 2004), etc. New palettes are implemented by extending
basic nodes and edges, programming the new necessary functionalities and providing
them with a convenient shape. The functionalities of saving and retrieving the work
are provided by the tool, as well as the possibility of working collaboratively in

Interactive Learning Environments

293

a synchronous and asynchronous way (as discussed below). For this project, the idea
was to model the data ﬂow to do the necessary calculations and graphics in order to
ﬁnd the speciﬁc parameters which characterize an earthquake. For this purpose, a
new palette was implemented with nodes providing the functionalities to retrieve
data from the seismographs, show the shape of the generated wave permitting the
measurement of the amplitude and the time diﬀerence between the hit of the two
waves of an earthquake, calculate distances and show the necessary graphics to help
ﬁnding the epicenter by triangulation. The tool supports the students in their
calculations and graphics by providing a suitable working area, which is meant to
contain the workﬂow of the students’ activities. A workﬂow is represented as a
network of diﬀerent types of nodes, each one implementing a step toward the
calculation of the epicenter. Students have to create the workﬂow graph by dragging
the nodes from the palette and dropping them in the working area. The nodes have
diﬀering appearance according to their functionalities (Figure 3). Adding an edge
between two nodes transfers output values of one node as input values for the
successor, but of course, this is allowed by the system only between nodes where this
operation makes sense.

One type of node (the ﬁrst in the sequence of Figure 3) is able to search for events
in the repositories. Another one (second in the sequence) can read and store the data

Figure 3. Left: the workspace with the nodes needed to search for an event and download its
corresponding data, process the data, and show the wave corresponding to one seismograph.
Right: the palette with all the available nodes.

294

N. Baloian et al.

of a ﬁle generated by a seismic sensor. It also displays useful information like date
and duration of the event. Another type of node (third in Figure 3) is able to
graphically display this information, if the students connect them with an arc. Thus,
the students can easily determine the time lag between the primary and secondary
waves, just by marking this space in the graphic node (as seen in Figure 1). The
student can also zoom in and out,
scroll or mark relevant data points.
The determined time lag is the basis for further calculations as mentioned above.
The ‘calculation node’ uses this value to compute the distance dependent on the time
lag and the iteratively chosen depth. Establishing a connection with another node
called ‘Map Node’ displays the map of the speciﬁc region, e.g. Santiago and the
computed distances as well.

The minimum of the intersection can easily be found using this two-dimensional
top view (Figure 4). In this way, this nodes network oﬀers a workﬂow to exchange
results and/or intermediate data. The way the tool implements the support calculation
of the earthquakes’ characteristics is the key to implement the CBL approach: teachers
can assign diﬀerent challenges with various degrees of openness and diﬃculty. On one
end, students can be provided with an existing document with the whole workﬂow

Figure 4. Part of the workspace while searching for the epicenter with data from three
sensors. The map node is useful to ﬁnd the intersection point.

Interactive Learning Environments

295

needed to make all the calculations and be asked to just download the data to
determine the characteristics of an earthquake. On the other end, they can be
confronted with very open questions like ‘how is the seismic activity around the city of
Talca?’ or ‘which was the largest earthquake during last week?’ The system allows the
students to ﬁnd the information to answer these questions but the strategy followed by
a student may diﬀer from that used by another student.

6. Supporting authentic activities, construction and collaboration

As noted in section 1, according to Bellamy (1996), three principles for the design of
educational environments have been derived from Vygotsky’s work: authentic
activities, construction, and collaboration. Let us see how the presented approach
ﬁts these principles.

. Authentic activities: Students should have access to, and participate in, similar
cultural activities to those of adults and should be using age-appropriate tools
and artifacts modeled on those used by adults. The system creates the
environment for authentic activities because it gives the possibility for the
students to mimic the activities that
the professional people do while
monitoring and recording earthquakes, as well as calculating their characteristics 
using real professional data generated from the same sources that the
experts use.

. Construction: Children should construct artifacts and share them with their
community. SeisModes documents enable the collaborative construction of the
workﬂow for calculating the characteristics of the earthquake, which they can
share with other persons. On one hand, the system gives the appropriate
scaﬀolding for doing data transformation and calculating complicated
formulas, encapsulating them in order to drive the students’ attention to the
conceptual principles that are important to learn. On the other hand, it does
not automatically do all the calculations from the source data, as some
professional systems do: students must create the workﬂow.

. Collaboration: Educational environments should involve collaboration among
experts and students and among individual learners and fellow learners. This
setting allows various kinds of collaborative learning activities:
(1) Collaboration inside the group trying to compute the distance to the
hypocenter, based on local data. The tool supports asynchronous
collaboration by annotating and recording the work done by each
participant. Creating coupled sessions supports synchronous distributed
collaboration. For this purpose, the tool was integrated with MatchMaker
(Baloian, Pino, & Jansen, 2007; Jansen, 2003). It permits the creation and
coupling of shared workspaces where students can work synchronously
constructing the same graph.

(2) Collaboration among groups in the same earthquake region by exchanging
data produced by the seismograph is the ﬁrst collaborative step. As
calculating the distance to the hypocenter is based on a visual procedure,
this will necessarily mean the results of the diﬀerent groups will not be
exactly the same. The system gives the necessary platform for the groups to
engage in a discussion, trying to ﬁnd the most probable area where the
hypocenter was located, contrasting all the results.

296

N. Baloian et al.

(4) Collaboration among groups in diﬀerent regions is possible because the
system is working over the Internet. The system gives student groups
located in remote areas the possibility to use the same data, ask about the
consequences of the earthquake and try to ‘reproduce’ it in the virtual
laboratory. Asynchronous
(and even ‘anonymous’) collaboration is
allowed by the implementation of a learning material repository which
was set up for the COLDEX project. The CoolModes tool (and by
extension also SeisModes) has a built-in function to upload the work
currently in the workspace as a learning object. For this purpose, the
system will try to automatically gather as much information as possible to
ﬁll
the system’s
information,
the palettes being used, and the user
identiﬁcation if available. Missing metadata may be ﬁlled by the user.
The system also allows searching for an existing learning object in the
repository which has similar characteristics to the one on the workspace.

the required metadata using, e.g.

in the values of

the language,

It should be noted that an alternative DExT design could have forced students to
cooperate. For example, each student group could have been provided with data
from just one seismograph and, therefore, requiring them to communicate and
collaborate for at least sharing the data. However, that approach would have been
unnatural and thus opposed to the authenticity principle.

Our work has a lot of common ground with Edelson’s CoVis work (section 3).
Students have to learn to immerse in a real environment facing open ended
challenges. Communication among students is also a fundamental aspect in both
projects. In our case, we stress the use of scientiﬁc tools and real data. Our work is
also coherent with van Joolingen’s principles (as explained in section 3) as it merges
scientiﬁc discovery learning with collaborative knowledge construction thanks to the
use of the SeisModes tool.

7. Evaluation

7.1. Introduction

Although several teachers and students have been working with the tool during 2006
and 2007 with the developed system, we wanted to formally evaluate the students’
perception on the suitability of the tool for supporting learning earthquakes physics,
its potential to foster collaboration, and its ability to motivate the students, before
deploying it on a large scale in many schools. As Chile is a seismically active country,
its Ministry of Education has instructed schools to carry out activities in order to
increase the awareness of this phenomenon among the population. Thus, it was quite
easy for the authors to approach schools and oﬀer this material to be incorporated in
the curricula. The software has been used in three schools including two of those
having a seismograph installed in their premises and one which does not. We set up a
formal SeisModes evaluation in one of the schools with a seismograph, after several
formative assessments to get feedback information to improve it.

7.2. Method

The testing was done on subjects who were from a 10th school year class with all
students aged 16 and using SeisModes for the ﬁrst time in a school which had

Interactive Learning Environments

297

a seismograph installed in the schoolyard. Twenty-two students took part in the
testing, of which 15 were males and 7 were females. Eight of them said they used the
computer more than 6 h a week, 10 said they used it between 3 and 6 h, and only 4 of
them less than 3 h. Eighteen students said they use it mainly for entertainment and
socializing and 4 of them mainly for studying.

The testing was done in two sessions of about 2 h each during a physics
laboratory activity. The ﬁrst session consisted of a theoretical explanation about
earthquakes, a visit to the seismograph, and a short explanation on how to use the
SeisModes program to calculate the earthquake characteristics. A pre-test was also
taken before the ﬁrst session in order to measure the previous knowledge about
earthquakes. The same questions were asked at the end of the second session. For
the pre-test and the post-test, the questions were evaluated by the teacher with marks
ranging from 1 (the student has no idea) to 5 (the student answered the question very
well).

During the second session, they received a worksheet with activities that they had

to carry on to answer some questions. The questions were as follows:

. How many earthquakes happened during May 2006?
. Which was the strongest earthquake during that period of time?
. Where was the epicenter located?
. Paint the area on the map where people could feel that earthquake.
. Can you ﬁnd a stronger earthquake which took place in another period of

time?

Students had to work with SeisModes to answer those questions, which were
designed to be triggers for students to explore and learn about earthquakes. An
observer was recording interesting facts about the way the students worked with the
tool for completing the task. Two assistants helped the students with the usage of
SeisModes during the testing. After working with SeisModes, the students ﬁlled a
questionnaire which was designed to gather the required information in order to
validate or reject the following three hypotheses:

. Hypothesis 1: The tool is perceived as suitable for learning about the physics of

earthquakes.

. Hypothesis 2: The lesson involving the tool helps to understand the need for

collaboration.

. Hypothesis 3: The tool is considered as motivating.

The 22 participating students were asked to indicate their level of agreement with
12 statements on a scale ranging from 1 to 4 (1 for strong disagreement, 2 for
disagreement, 3 for agreement, 4 for strong agreement).

7.3. Results

The ﬁrst stage of the testing began with the application of the pre-test, which took
about 20 min. As expected, the background knowledge of the students was poor,
which was reﬂected in the results. The questions for the preand 
post-tests, as well as
the evaluations of both the tests are shown in Table 1. After the pre-test, the students
were allowed to see the school’s seismograph while explaining them, for about half

298

N. Baloian et al.

Table 1. The preand 
post-test questions and their evaluation results.

Question

Pre-test

Post-test

How does the ground moves during an earthquake?
How can you determine the distance from a sensor

to an earthquake epicenter?

What is the earthquake epicenter?
What is the earthquake hypocenter?
How can you determine the location of the

epicenter of an earthquake if you know the
location of the hypocenter?

What is the earthquake magnitude?
Which data do you require to calculate the earthquake magnitude?
Mean

2.77
2.18

1.91
1.45
2.45

2.50
2.36
2.23

4.23
3.68

4.14
3.45
4.77

3.77
4.00
4.00

an hour, about how a seismogram works. After this, they returned to the classroom,
where the teacher explained them the way an earthquake originates, how the waves
are propagated and the form a regular seismogram has due to the arrival of two
waves at diﬀerent times. The in-classroom lecture took about 45 min.

The second stage of the testing took place one week after the ﬁrst one. It began
with a review of the concepts learnt the week before (10 min) and a demonstration of
the SeisModes tool (20 min). After that, the students received the worksheet with the
questions they had to answer using SeisModes. All students could complete the tasks
within 90 min.

After completing the worksheet tasks, the students answered two questionnaires:
the post-test for evaluating the acquired knowledge and the one for validating the
four hypotheses. The questions for testing the hypotheses, along with the obtained
results are shown in Table 2.

7.4. Analysis of the results

Comparing the results of the preand 
post-tests, we see a dramatic improvement of
the students’ knowledge: from a mean of 2.23–4.00. Certainly, this shows that the
students had a poor knowledge of earthquakes before. It is diﬃcult to decide whether
this increase in knowledge was due to the tool or the teachers’ instructions. Although
this is true for the whole analysis, we do not consider this as an argument against the
results as the tool is explicitly intended to be used as part of such instructional
setting.

Hypothesis 1: The tool is perceived as suitable for learning about the physics of
earthquakes

Six statements were used to evaluate this hypothesis including ‘I do not know
how the tool could help me learn about earthquakes.’ Negatively formulated
statements like this were recoded for the statistical analysis so that high values reﬂect
a positive evaluation of the tool. First, we conducted a reliability analysis that
resulted in Cronbach’s a ¼ 0.95. Therefore, it seemed reasonable to summarize the
six items in one variable. This new variable was derived by averaging the evaluation
of the corresponding six items. It yielded a mean value of M ¼ 3.40 and a standard
deviation of SD ¼ 0.68. Applying a one-sample T-test against the test value of 2.5

Interactive Learning Environments

299

Table 2. List of assertions associated to each hypothesis.

Hypotheses and related questions

H1. The tool was perceived as suitable for learning

about the earthquakes physics.

1.1. The framework for calculation helped me to understand

the necessary steps.

1.2. The tool helped me to understand how experts calculate the epicenter.
1.3. I found the tool suitable for learning about the earthquakes physics.
1.4 The visualization was helpful for understanding the waves propagation.

1.5. The tool helped me to understand the mutual dependency of the

variables.

Result

3.27

3.55
3.73
3.23
2.91

1.6. I do not know how the tool could help me to learn about earthquakes.

1.27 (2.73)

Mean value
H2. Working with the tool helps to understand the need for collaboration.

2.1. Due to the tool I understood, why several people have to collaborate
2.2. I appreciated the discussion in class about how to optimize

the measures. It helped us to obtain better results.

2.3. If possible I would appreciate a discussion among various groups

at diﬀerent schools each one managing one sensor.

Mean value
H3. The tool was experienced as motivating

3.1. I would have preferred to learn only with textbooks and drawings
3.2. It was boring to work with the tool.
3.3. Working with the tool motivated me to learn more about earthquakes
3.4. The tool engaged me to explore variations in the steps and solution

Mean value

3.24

3.00
2.96

3.18

3.05

3.28

1.28 (2.72)

3.42
2.68
3.03

Students expressed their level of agreement with each one with a number between 1 and 4. Assertions 1.6
and 3.2 were negatively formulated so we used the complementary value for calculating the mean value.

yielded highly signiﬁcant results with t(21) ¼ 6.22, p  0.001. These results validate
our ﬁrst hypothesis. This is also coherent with the results obtained with the
knowledge questionnaire: it seems that the tool had played an important role in their
development of knowledge about earthquakes the students do attribute.

Hypothesis 2: The lesson involving the tool helps to understand the need for
collaboration
Three items contributed to this hypothesis. Again the scale comprising those three
items was highly consistent with Cronbach’s a ¼ 0.87, the mean value M ¼ 3.05
and the average SD ¼ 0.83. Applying a one sample T-test yielded highly signiﬁcant
results with t(21) ¼ 3.2, p ¼ 0.005, also conﬁrming the validity of this hypothesis,
although not as strongly as it was the case for the ﬁrst hypothesis. This is also
supported by the fact
that during the testing we noted that some students
spontaneously tended to form groups
the
correctness of their results, and the reasons why in some cases they obtained
diﬀerent results. This was one of the goals we wanted to achieve, as explained in
section 6, items (1) and (2). Although the experimental results show that the tool
does help understanding the need for collaboration while learning, the small scope
of the experiment did not allow testing the potentials of the tool for fostering
asynchronous collaboration, during a longer period of time, as explained in section
6, item (3).

to compare results and discuss

300

N. Baloian et al.

Hypothesis 3: The tool is considered as motivating
Three items contributed to this hypothesis. Cronbach’s a was 0.89, the mean value
M ¼ 3.03 and the SD ¼ 0.81. Applying a one sample T-test yielded highly
signiﬁcant results with t(21) ¼ 3.61, p ¼ 0.002. These results also conﬁrm the
validity of the hypothesis. In fact, the tool motivated the students who completed the
worksheet earlier to work on new, self-deﬁned tasks, like confectioning a map
showing the epicenter of earthquakes occurring in the last month, or a map showing
the magnitudes an earthquake had at various locations.

We may conclude that the students’ evaluation of the tool supported our hypotheses
that the tool is suitable and motivating to learn about seismography and that the lesson
involving the tool may foster an understanding of the need for collaboration.

8. Conclusions

In this work, we presented a new way of implementing authenticity in learning activities
through an open environment which includes the challenge component. Students work
with real data generated by professional instruments but they are assisted in the stage of
processing the data by a software environment which spares them from doing tedious
computations even though it does not do all the jobs for them. The software implements
an open environment where diﬀerent kinds of challenges with various degrees of
diﬃculty can be proposed to the student in order to trigger a research activity which
mimics the work of real professionals. This whole system consists of hardware,
software, and connectivity and it implements access to real high-quality data generated
from professional seismographs and to data generated from the seismographs in the
schools, as well as functionalities to support the analysis of the data.

Giving the students access to instruments and data otherwise used only by
professionals increases the motivation of the students for studying the phenomena
but it is not enough to guarantee a successful learning process. It is also important to
provide them with an environment where they can process their data to respond to
open challenges with the necessary help and scaﬀolding to enable meaningful
learning through remote or distributed collaborative experimentation.

The work described in this article allows various types of collaborative learning, as
the results of others are used for own work, and vice versa. The collaborative
opportunities provided by the setting occur naturally. This is perhaps the main diﬀerence
with other collaborative learning experiments in which the collaboration is artiﬁcially
induced. Of course, the SeisModes software could be used in a non-collaborative
way; this also occurs in the professional world using the corresponding tools.
Consequently, the DExT designer has to decide between the authenticity and the
imposed collaboration. Both have advantages and disadvantages. We believe that the
students will be convinced of the advantages of collaboration if they have the choice to do
the work either individually or cooperatively and if they can compare the results by
themselves.

Following our approach to collaborative learning, students from diﬀerent
cultural backgrounds but sharing the fact of living in seismic active areas (e.g. Japan,
Peru and Italy) can work together exchanging ‘learning artifacts’ through a learning
object repository. It is also possible to integrate students who are not subjected to
earthquakes but who are willing to learn and share others’ experiences.

For students living in seismic areas, this is an opportunity to scientiﬁcally
understand the natural phenomena and be prepared for earthquakes. It is a way of

Interactive Learning Environments

301

educating people living in seismic active areas to increase their awareness and motivate
them to be prepared for the eventuality of a large earthquake. An understanding of the
phenomenon may also lead to reducing fear and anxiety. Moreover, this process of
personal growth is done cooperatively with other students.

Currently, we are working on improving the tool itself, as well as on developing a
setting in order to allow its usage on a larger scale. As for the tool itself, we are working on
making it easily customizable to be adapted and used with data and maps of diﬀerent
seismic active regions. On the other hand, a plan is being developed to introduce the tool in
schools nationwide. The goals we are trying to achieve are to fully integrate the learning
activities into the school’s curricula and to promote the creation of a learning community
around geophysics. Geophysics itself is not a topic on the Chilean schools’ oﬃcial
curricula, but the study of wave propagation is. Therefore, we see a good opportunity to
smoothly integrate learning activities with SeisModes into the regular curricula. To
promote the creation of a learning community and collaboration, we will adopt the model
developed in the COLDEX project (see Baloian et al., 2006; COLDEX, 2008). First, a web
page will be developed. This page will contain all the required material for working with
SeisModes (including the software itself, instructions for its usage, and learning material in
general). It will also implement a repository for uploading and downloading from
SeisMode’s pages, containing the students’ work, thus allowing a ‘loose collaboration’
among students from diﬀerent schools by exchanging their works. This strategy will allow
to ﬁnally test the ability of the setting to support collaboration as described in section 6,
item (3).

Notes on contributors

Nelson Baloian is an Associate Professor at the Department of Computer Science at the
Universidad de Chile, in Santiago, Chile. He was awarded a PhD in 1998 at the University of
Duisburg in Germany. Since then his main research topics have been Computer Supported
Collaborative Work in general and Computer Supported Collaborative Learning in particular,
and the development of technologies and methodologies using information technologies to
support learning inside and outside the classroom. He is an author and co-author of more than
60 scientiﬁc articles. He is also a regular visiting professor at the University of Waseda, Tokyo
and at the University of Duisburg-Essen, Germany.

Jose A. Pino is a Full Professor of Computer Science at the University of Chile. He is a member
of the CARL (Collaborative Applications Research Laboratory) group at the Department of
Computer Science. His research interests are Educational Informatics and Computer-Supported
Cooperative Work. He has published papers in many journals, namely Journal of the ACM,
Communications of the ACM, Information Sciences, Information Research, Group Decision
and Negotiation, Decision Support Systems, Educational Technology and Society, Knowledge
and Information Systems, Interacting with Computers, Computing and Informatics, Multimedia 
Tools and Applications, and Journal of Universal Computer Science.

Jens Hardings is an Assistant Professor of the Computer Science department of the Pontiﬁcia
Universidad Cato´ lica de Chile, Santiago, Chile since 2006. He was awarded a PhD from
Universidad de Chile in 2006, having spent a 2-year period in Universita¨ t Duisburg-Essen with
a scholarship from the German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD). His research interests
include Open Source Software, Social Software and the inﬂuence of IT in society, as well as
Computer Security and Computer Networks.

References
Baloian, N., Hoeksema, K., Milrad, M., & Hoppe, H. (2006). Technologies and educational
activities for supporting and implementing challenge-based learning. In D. Kumar &
J. Turner (Eds.), Education for the 21st Century (IFIP Vol. 210, pp. 10–160). New York,
NY: Springer.

302

N. Baloian et al.

Baloian, N., Pino, J.A., & Jansen, M. (2007). Implementing the coupled objects paradigm for
synchronizing distributed applications through ﬁrewalls. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, 4402, 599–608.

Bellamy, R.K.E. (1996). Designing educational technology: Computer-mediated change. In
B.A. Nardi (Ed.), Context and consciousness: Activity theory and human-computerinteraction 
(pp. 123–146). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Bertelsen, O.W., & Bodker, S. (2003). Activity theory. In J.M. Caroll (Ed.), HCI models,
theories and frameworks. Toward a multidisciplinary science (pp. 291–324). New York, NY:
Morgan Kaufmann.

Bollen, L., Hoppe, H.U., Milrad, M., & Pinkwart, N. (2002). Collaborative modelling in
group learning environments. In XX International Conference of the System Dynamics
Society. Palermo (Italy), July 2002. Retrieved November 15, 2008, from http://www.
systemdynamics.org/conferences/2002/papers/Bollen1.pdf

Boston College Educational Seismology project (2008). Retrieved November 14, 2008, from

http://www2.bc.edu/*kafka/SeismoEd/BC_ESP_Home.html

COLDEX Project. (2008). Retrieved November 14, 2008, from http://www.coldex.info
COLLIDE Group. (2008). Retrieved November 14, 2008, from http://www.collide.info
Edelson, D.C.

(1998). Realising authentic science learning through the adaptation of
science practice. In B.J. Fraser & K. Tobin (Eds.), International handbook of science
education (pp. 317–331). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic.

Edelson, D.C., Gordin, D.N., & Pea, R.D. (1999). Addressing the challenges of inquiry-based
learning through technology and curriculum design. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 8, 391–450.
Hoeksema, K., & Hoppe, H.U. (2004). Combining interactive modelling and scientiﬁc
discovery in the classroom. In IADIS Conference of Cognition and Exploratory Learning in
Digital Age, CELDA 2004 (pp. 107–114). Lisbon, Portugal: IADIS Press.

IRIS. (2007). Retrieved November 14, 2008, from http://www.iris.edu
Jansen, M. (2003). Matchmaker tng – a framework to support collaborative java applications.

Proceedings of the AIED 2003 (pp. 535–536). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: IOS Press.

Jonassen, D.H., & Murphy, L.R. (1999). Activity theory as framework for designing constructivist

learning environments. Educational Technology Research and Development, 47(1), 61–79.

Moher, T., Hussain, S., Halter, T., & Kilb, D. (2005). Roomquake: Embedding dynamic
phenomena within the physical space of an elementary school classroom. In Proceedings of
the CHI005 conference (pp. 1665–1667). New York, NY: ACM Press.

Mu¨ ller, J., Mu¨ hlenbrock, M., & Pinkwart, N. (2004). Towards using concept mapping for

math learning. IEEE Learning Technology Newsletter, 6(3), 13–15.

Pinkwart, N. (2003). A plug-in architecture for graph based collaborative modeling systems.
In Proceedings of the 11th Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Education (pp. 535–536).
Amsterdam, The Netherlands: IOS Press.

Pinkwart, N., Hoppe, H.U., & Gaßner, K. (2001). Integration of domain-speciﬁc elements
into visual language based collaborative environments. In 7th International Workshop on
Groupware, CRIWG 2001 (pp. 142–147). Darmstadt, Germany: IEEE Computer Society
Press.

Quintana, C., Carra, A., Krajcik, J., & Soloway, E. (2001). Learner-centered design:
Reﬂections and new directions. In J.M. Carroll (Ed.), Human-computer interaction in the
new millennium (pp. 605–624). Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.

Reeves, T.C., Herrington, J., & Oliver, R. (2002). Authentic activities and online learning. In
A. Goody, J. Herrington, & M. Northcote (Eds.), Quality conversations: Research and
development in higher education (Vol. 25, pp. 562–567). Jamison, ACT: HERDSA.

Reinmann-Rothmeier, G., & Mandl, H. (2001). Unterrichten und Lernumgebungen gestalten.
In A. Krapp & B. Weidemann (Eds.), Pa¨dagogische Psychologie (Chapter 13) (pp. 603–
648). Weinheim, Germany: Beltz.

SEISAN Software. (2008). Retrieved November 14, 2008, from http://www.geo.uib.no/

seismo/software/software.html

USESN: United States Educational Seismograph Network. (2008). Retrieved November 14,

2008, from http://www.indiana.edu/*usesn/

Van Joolingen, W.R. (2000). Designing for collaborative intelligent tutoring systems. Lecture

Notes in Computer Science, 1839, 202–211.

Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

