Document Management in a Computer-Integrated

Classroom

Nelson Baloian1, Alexander Berges2, Stephan Buschmann2, Katrin Gaßner2,

Jens Hardings2, Heinz Ulrich Hoppe2, and Wolfram Luther2

1 Universidad de Chile, Departamento de Ciencias de la Computacion, Blanco Encalada

2120, Santiago, Chile

{NBaloian}@dcc.uchile.cl

2 University of Duisburg, Institute for Computer Science and Interactive Systems, Lotharstr.

65, 47048 Duisburg, Germany

Alex.Berges@uni-duisburg.de, {buschmann, gassner, hardings,

hoppe, luther}@collide.info

www.collide.info

and  non-distributed 

Abstract.  This  paper  reports  on  a  work  in-progress  scenario  of  a  computerintegrated 
 classroom  (CiC)  with  a  focus  on  document  management  and
document  sharing.  Following  a  brief  introduction  on  the  topic  of  distributed
(distance) 
system´s
functionalities and architecture are being described, as well as the file structure
to be found in the document archive. The system  uses a  unique type of XML
document  that  can  be  created  and  edited  by  the  FreeStyler  application.  The
paper  then  concludes  with  a  short  description  about  the  future  work  on  the
project.

the 

(face-to-face) 

learning, 

1  Introduction

Traditionally,  most  of  the  research  efforts  in  Computer  Supported  cooperative
Learning  (CSCL)  areas  have  been  dedicated  to  develop  distance  learning  scenarios
(for a good covering of this issue see [4]), still most learning activities take place in
the  traditional  classroom,  i.e.  in  a  face-to-face  learning  scenario.  It  is  still  an  open
question if future learning will take place in the more de-personalized way of “virtual
learning”  or  continue  in  the  traditional  style.  Meanwhile,  there  are  still  classrooms,
and there are people, namely teachers, whose responsibility it is to organize classroom
learning. Accepting this reality, we can still ask what could be gained by using new
information  and  communication  technologies  in  classrooms.  Motivated  by  the  fact
that  innovative  hardware  and  software  has  made  its  way  to  the  classroom,  some
systems  supporting  in  classroom  learning  scenarios  have  been  developed  [5,  9].  In
this  paper  we  present  a  system  supporting  teacher  and  student  sharing  learning
documents  in  a  computer-integrated  classroom  (CiC).  The  original  idea  of  a
computer-integrated  face-to-face  classroom  was  exemplified  in  the  COSOFT
environment  [2,3].  Recently,  the  CiC  idea  was  adapted  to  “early  learning”  in  a
primary  school  classroom  [10]  as  well  as  to  academic  lecturing  [7].  We  share  the

J.M. Haake and J.A. Pino (Eds.): CRIWG 2002, LNCS 2440, pp. 35–44, 2002.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2002

36 

N. Baloian et a1 

same principles which are behind the development of systems like Classroom2000  [I] 
and  the  electronic  classroom  used  by  ITM  [13]  about  ubiquitous  computing  in the 
classroom  [12]. However, Classroom2000  is oriented to capture the lecture  and store 
it  in files  and the  ITM  classroom  is  oriented  to  remote  lecturing.  In our  project  we 
address  the  problem  of  document  management  (distribution,  collection,  sharing) 
inside  (and outside) the classroom. It differs from the traditional  courseware  creation 
and  managing  systems  in  that  it  combines  traditional  face-to-face  lecturing  with 
computer  supported  collaborative  learning.  In  a  CiC  setup the  teacher  presents  the 
learning material  (multimedia documents)  on an electronic blackboard.  Every student 
has  a  notebook  or  PDA,  while  the  technical  system  provides  the  functionalities  of 
interaction  among  the  multiple  computers.  A  wireless  LAN  connects  the  student's 
computer  with  the  electronic  blackboard,  and  there  is  a  server  (outside  the  local 
network)  which  provides  and  stores learning  material.  A  CiC  also  includes systems 
which help teacher and students to recover, manage and share learning material. 

The  CiC  combines  positive  aspects  of  the  classical  chalkboard  approach, 
particularly its flexibility in the spontaneous elaboration of ideas, with the potential of 
modern  networked  multimedia.  The  value  added 
in  the  avoidance  of 
discontinuities  in representations  ("media  breaks").  In  the  CiC  approach  presented 
here,  re-use  and  exchange  of  results,  either  synchronous  or  asynchronous,  is  easily 
possible.  The  full spectrum  of basic  representations,  ranging  from  freehand input  to 
sophisticated simulation and animation is available. 

lies 

7 MW variolu 

Fig. 1. The computer-integrated  classroom scenario. 

The  work  presented  in this  paper  was  motivated  by  concrete  experience  from  a 
lecture about programming  in distributed systems held at Duisburg University.  Many 
problems  occurred  which  could  have  been  avoided  by  having  an  administration 
system for the learning  material  of the  course. The  same group is now  designing and 
developing the CiC system for this particular  case. The work reported here focuses on 
the teacher's  work-plan (in a classroom). 

