Blind to Sighted Children Interaction  
Through Collaborative Environments 

Jaime Sánchez, Nelson Baloian, and Tiago Hassler  

University of Chile, Department of Computer Science 

Blanco Encalada 2120, Santiago, Chile 

{jsanchez,nbaloian,thassler}@dcc.uchile.cl 

Abstract.  In  this  paper  we  present  a  software  system  implementing  a  remote 
synchronous  collaborative  “Battleship”  game  that  can  be  played  by  two  persons.
  The system provides two different  interfaces, one to be used by sighted 
people and the other to be used by blind people based on spatialized sound, thus 
allowing sighted and blind people play against each other, without knowing if 
the adversary is a sighted or blind person. The paper also presents a framework 
which supports the synchronisation of heterogeneous applications sharing only 
some common objects. This is the key for developing collaborative applications 
with very different interfaces as it is shown in this work.  

1   Introduction 

In  the  recent  times,  many  efforts  have  been  done  in  order  to  integrate  people  with 
disabilities into the digital world [6]. Deaf people have not so many problems using 
the standard software interfaces as most of them rely principally on visual information.
 For blind people the situation is much more disadvantageous. In order to create 
software for them it is necessary to design other ways to interact with the computer. 
Applications conceived for the blind user have been developed using auditory information 
as the main output channel and haptic devices for input [1, 3, 4, 7, 8]. These 
systems have been principally developed to help blind people to overcome their difficulties 
with standard interfaces such as Web-pages "readers" e.g. Jaws. Others focus 
on the development of 3D audio interfaces used to develop the user’s skills to recognize 
 spatial  environments  through  sound.  However,  we  have  no  record  of  research 
work  on  collaborative  environments  including  people  with  disabilities  performing 
blind-blind and blind-sighted interactions.  

The WISIWYS paradigm has been very important in the development of synchronous 
 collaborative  applications  but  we  cannot  apply  it  in  this  context.  We  need  to 
implement different types of interactions since people with different ways of perceiving 
the environment need specific strategies to establish a common ground.  

In this research work we tried to make a first attempt to study the challenges and 
issues that arise when trying to develop and use collaborative systems for people with 
different perceptual abilities. To do this we implemented a computer-based version of 
the famous board game Battleship. This game is a good metaphor for implementing 
such a collaborative system. On the one hand, when playing the game blind users will 
train  their  abilities  of  spatial  memory.  On  the  other  hand,  it  allows  the  interaction 
between blind and sighted people without knowing each of them the condition of the 
other, thus allowing an interaction without prejudgments.  

G.-J. de Vreede et al. (Eds.): CRIWG 2004, LNCS 3198, pp. 192–205, 2004. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004 

Blind to Sighted Children Interaction Through Collaborative Environments      193 

Developing collaborative systems for integrating people with different capabilities 
poses  a  higher  challenge  because  of  the  synchronization  of  different  interfaces  for 
each type of user. Interfaces for the sighted user normally consist of computer graphical 
 user  displays  and  some  sound  for  the  output.  The  keyboard  and  mouse  are  the 
most common devices for input. Interfaces for blind users rely principally on auditory 
information for output and keyboards, and other haptic devices for input [9]. Sometimes 
joysticks are used for both input (movement) and output, but they pose some 
resistance in order to simulate the contour objects.  

This  research  study  presents  the  design,  development,  and  usability  testing  of 
AudioBattleShip,  a  sound-based  interactive  and  collaborative environment for blind 
children. This system is a similar version of the traditional battleship game for sighted 
people but including both a graphical interface for sighted users and an audio-based 
interface for blind people. AudioBattleShip provides a game environment to enhance 
group interaction, abstract memory, spatial abstraction, and haptic perception in blind 
learners. This study also introduces a platform which supports programming of distributed 
 applications,  especially  for  the  case  of  synchronizing  applications  having 
different interfaces.  

To design and develop information-equivalent interfaces (see [12]) for sighted and 
blind people we followed a similar process such as the one described in [2] for developing 
interfaces for people with disabilities.  

Finally, a full usability study has been implemented to evaluate the cognitive impact 
of interacting with AudioBattleShip, showing that blind learner collaboration and 
cognition skills can be enhanced through the interaction with spatialized sound. 

2   The AudioBattleShip Design 

2.1   Playing Modes and Phases 

As the aim of this game is to engage blind people in a collaborative environment to 
help  them  develop  cognitive  skills  we  decided  to  provide  various  playing  modes. 
AudioBattleShip  can  be  played  blind  to  blind  and  blind  to  sighted.  Blind  to  blind 
mode presents the same interfaces to both players. Blind to sighted mode provides a 
variety of tools to the blind learner to minimize the disadvantages in comparison with 
sighted learners who can have in any moment snapshots of the state of actions.  

AudioBattleShip has three phases (see Figure 1):  

1.  Ship positioning phase: the player chooses the position of ships taken from a predefined 
set on the battlefield. A matrix represents a battlefield where ships can be 
placed over a column and a row by covering different numbers of spaces according 
to the type of ship. 

2.  Creating and joining session phase: After placing the ships, a player can choose 
between creating a new session of the game, joining an existing one, and playing 
against the computer. If a new session is created, another player can join it. To do 
this the player has to know the session’s name and the host address. 

3.  Shooting  phase:  By  taking  turns  both  players  can  manipulate  a  matrix  with  the 
board’s state by identifying a cell of the matrix representing the contender's battlefield 
 for  dropping  a  bomb  on  that  place.  The  system  responds  whether  a  con-
tender's ship was hit or not. 

