A Model for a Collaborative Recommender System  

for Multimedia Learning Material  

Nelson Baloian1, Patricio Galdames1,2, César A. Collazos3, and Luis A. Guerrero1 

1 Department of Computer Science 

Universidad de Chile 

Blanco Encalada 2120, Santiago, Chile 

{nbaloian,pgaldame,luguerre}@dcc.uchile.cl 

2 Department of Electrical Engineering 

Universidad de Chile 

Tupper 2007, Santiago, Chile 

3 Department of Systems 
Universidad del Cauca 

FIET-Sector Tulcan, Popayán, Colombia 
{ccollazo}@unicauca.edu.co 

Abstract.  In  a  cluster  of  many  servers  containing  heterogeneous  multimedia 
learning material and serving users with different backgrounds (e.g. language, 
interests,  previous  knowledge,  hardware  and  connectivity)  it  may  be  difficult 
for the learners to find a piece of material which fit their needs. This is the case 
of the COLDEX project. Recommender systems have been used to help people 
sift through all the available information to find that most valuable to them. We 
propose  a  recommender  system,  which  suggest  multimedia  learning  material 
based on the learner's background preferences as well as the available hardware 
and software that he/she has. 

1   Introduction 

As the amount of available information in the world increases, recommender systems 
are becoming more important to help us receive that information which is more important 
to us. Recomender systems may be based on content analysis or on collaborative 
filtering. In the first case the content of a document is usually analyzed automatically 
to extract its relevant characteristics by the application of different metrics. The 
characteristics  are  then  compared  with  those  desired.  In  the  second  case,  these  systems 
base their decisions on opinions given by users that previously.  Both types of 
systems  use  user-modeling  methodologies.  Some  techniques,  which  have  been  successfully 
 used  to  accomplish  this  task,  are  Bayesian  networks  with  Markov  chains 
[15]  and  similarity  metrics  de  [14].  In  a  computer  supported  learning  environment 
consisting of many servers located in different parts of the world containing rapidly 
changing learning material of very heterogeneous characteristics a user will certainly 
have some problems locating suitable learning material for him/her. Moreover, if the 
learners have very different backgrounds, learning needs, equipment, and connectivity 
a  recommender  system  may  be  a  very  useful  tool.  This  is  exactly  the  case  of  the 
COLDEX [6] project, which aims to develop distributed collaborative learning enviG.
-J. de Vreede et al. (Eds.): CRIWG 2004, LNCS 3198, pp. 281–288, 2004. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004 

282      Nelson Baloian et al. 

ronments by remote distributed experimentation for learning communities in Europe 
and  South  America.  The  COLDEX  network  consists  of  interconnected  networks  of 
server  nodes,  each  one  supporting  a  particular  learning  community.  Experimental 
equipment however maybe distributed across the entire network. For example, there 
are telescopes in Chile and Spain, Seismographs in Chile, and a greenhouse in Sweden,
 all them connected to the network. Appropriate software provides interfaces for 
collaboratively work and learn with them.    

In this paper we present a preliminary work which aims to develop a recommender 
system  for  the  above-described  environment.  Since  the  learning  material  consists 
mainly in learning objects of different multimedia nature, an automatic analysis of the 
content is not practicable. Therefore human experts do a first characterization of the 
learning objects of the network. It is important to note that this characterization aims 
to  capture  the  essential  learning  potentials  of  a  learning  object,  as  opposed  to  [7], 
where a methodology for evaluating multimedia is described which takes in account 
only  the  presentation  and  usability  of  the  material.    There  have  been  some  works 
aimed to predict the degree of acceptation a user may have of a multimedia file, like 
the work presented in [13] with images but it does not consider a the importance this 
material has for the user in the context of his/her work.  

This work proposes a methodology for characterizing multimedia learning material 
based on the use of collaborative techniques in order to define a vector of characteristics 
for a certain document. This vector will reflect the opinion the people who have 
seen this document before and will evolve as new people express their opinion about 
the document.  However, not all users will get the same vector as description of one 
document.  In  order  to  construct  the  vector  for  a  certain  user,  the  opinion  given  by 
those  with  similar  interest  will  have  more  weight.  Current  recommender  systems 
mostly do not use implicit ratings, nor is the ability of implicit ratings to predict actual 
user interest well understood. An adaptive method should be able to learn and "cali-
brate" the learner’s preferences based on her/his behavior. Apart from the preferences 
about  the  content  of  the  learning  material  expressed  by  the  learner  the  system  will 
also consider the possibilities he/she has to display/perform a certain kind of learning 
object. This corresponds to the characteristics of the software, hardware and connection 
the learner has available by the moment a searching requirement is expressed or a 
certain learning material suggested. These might or might not be taken in account by 
the learner in order to decide whether to download the material or not. The next section 
presents some works related to recommender systems. In section 3 we illustrate 
the model proposed. Section 4 describes how the model works in the real situation of 
the COLDEX project. Finally section 5 presents some conclusions and further work. 

2   Related Work 

A  variety  of  collaborative  filters  or  recommender  systems  have  been  designed  and 
deployed.  The  Tapestry  system  relied  on  each  user  to  identify  like-minded  users 
manually  [10]  and  is  one  of  the  earliest  implementation  of  collaborative  filteringbased 
recommender systems. However, because this system depends on each person 
knowing the others, it is not suitable for large. Later several rating-based automated 
recommender systems were developed. Grouplens (Resn94) and Ringo (Shar95) developed 
independently systems, where the first CF algorithms for automatic predic-

