MobileMath: the Phone, the Game and the Math 
Monica Wijers1, Vincent Jonker1, Kristel Kerstens2
1Freudenthal Institute, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands 
2Waag Society, Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
m.wijers@fi.uu.nl
v.jonker@fi.uu.nl  
kristel@waag.org   
 
Abstract: Computer games appear to be able to engage students in meaningful learning, inside as 
well as outside of school. Mobile games, especially location-based games played on mobile phones 
with GPS, integrate the player's position into the game-play and thus support situative learning. This 
type of games can augment the reality by adding 'virtual elements' to it. In this paper we discuss the 
results of a pilot study on MobileMath, a location-based mobile game that integrates concepts from 
mathematics and geography. 
MobileMath  is  played  on  a  mobile  phone  with  a  GPS  receiver.  It  is  designed  to  investigate  how  a 
modern, social type of game can contribute to students engagement in learning mathematics. Teams 
compete on the playing field by gaining points by covering as much area as possible. They do this by 
constructing  squares,  rectangles  or  parallelograms  by  physically  walking  to  and  clicking  on  each 
vertex (point). The shapes they construct are virtual elements added to the real world. As the game 
proceeds the free playing space gets smaller. It is possible to 'hinder' other teams and to deconstruct 
the shapes they made, points are gained by this also. During the game, in real-time the locations of all 
teams  and  all  finished  quadrilaterals  are  visible  on  each  mobile  phone.  The  game  data  are  stored 
online and can be viewed back and discussed later. 
In this pilot study the usability of MobileMath was tested with three different secondary schools. Four 
one-hour  games,  each  with  seven  or  eight  teams  of  two  students  (n=60),  were  played  around  the 
schools. Data were gathered by means of (participatory) observation, analysis of the games played, a 
survey and interviews with students and teachers. 
The results show highly motivated students, who enjoyed playing the game. Students indicated they 
learned to use the GPS, to read a map and how to construct quadrilaterals. 
 
Keywords: game-based learning, mobile games, GPS, mathematics education 
 
1. Introduction: Game-based learning with location-based mobile games 
Computer  games  appear  to  be  able  to  engage  students  in  meaningful  learning,  inside  as  well  as 
outside of school (Gee 2003; Shaffer 2006; DeVane 2008). They fit in the digital lifestyle of the new 
generation  and  have  great  motivational  power.  According  to  Egenfeldt-Nielsen  (2005)  computer 
games  facilitate  learning  environments  with  peer-collaboration,  constructions  of  knowledge,  new 
teacher roles and a changed student role. In order to be effective the games need to be embedded in 
other learning activities. This fits the view that learning is more effective when it is situated (Lave & 
Wenger 1991). Other factors associated with effective learning are that learning should be realistic or 
authentic and collaborative (O’Donnell 2005). 
Mobile devices make it possible to integrate these characteristics of effective learning. In the definition 
of O’Malley (2003) mobile learning is any sort of learning that happens when the learner is not at a 
fixed,  predetermined  location,  or  that  happens  when  the  learner  takes  advantage  of  learning 
opportunities offered by mobile technologies. A key characteristic of mobile learning is that it enables 
knowledge building and constructing understanding by learners in different contexts (Winters  2007). 
Consequently it is a small step from mobile learning to mobile gaming. Mobile gaming is a general 
term that covers a large range including playing casual games on a mobile phone as well as using 
highly interactive location-based games on mobile devices, where real and virtual world are mixed. 
Recent  research  has  shown  that  the  use  of  mobile  location-aware  games  can  contribute  to 
engagement  and  meaningful  learning  on  several  school  and  academic  subjects  such  as  history 
(Admiraal et al 2007) and science (Squire & Klopfer 2007; Squire 2008). 
Mathematics is traditionally seen by a lot of secondary school students as a boring, difficult subject 
with not much personal involvement or social aspects. What is true for effective learning in general 
can also be applied to the learning of mathematics: in order to be effective the mathematics should be 
meaningful to the students. The theory of Realistic Mathematics Education (RME) (Gravemeijer 1994) 
stresses  that  problem  situations  presented  in  learning  activities  should  be  'experientially'  real  to 
students. Other important tenets of RME are that students own productions and constructions should 
be used and that social interaction is a necessary condition for learning mathematics. With the design 
With the design and evaluation of the game MobileMath (Demeyer et al 2008) which we discuss in 

 
 

this paper, we have tried to effectuate a combination of principles of RME with principles of mobile 
game-based  learning.  The  game  MobileMath  is  a  location-based  game  that  can  be  played  on  a 
mobile phone with a GPS receiver. MobileMath integrates the players position into the game-play and 
thus  supports  situative,  authentic  and  collaborative  learning  of  mathematics.  This  type  of  games 
augments the reality by adding 'virtual elements' to it. A term that stresses the combination of reality 
and  virtual  elements  is  'hybrid  reality  game'.  'Hybrid  reality  games  (HRGs)  employ  mobile 
technologies and GPS devices as tools for transforming physical spaces into interactive game boards' 
(De Souza e Silva & Delacruz 2006  p. 231). MobileMath is in this respect a Hybrid Reality Game. The 
players  are  immersed  in  a  mixed  reality  game  environment.  This  type  of  exciting  mixed  reality 
experience can contribute a lot to the fun and engagement (Schwabe & Göth  2005). 
 
2. Objectives  
The central question of the pilot study this paper reports about is: 

Can  the  design  and  use  of  a  social  mobile  game,    based  on  the  geographical  reality,  the 
virtual  representation  of  it  (map)  and    location-sensitive  technologies  lead  to  engaging  and 
meaningful mathematics learning for students in grades 7 and 8 (aged 12-14)? 

The following aspects of the central question were addressed in a pilot study at three schools: 

(cid:131)  The phone, i.e. technology 

Can we make a technical environment that is flexible enough to be used in an actual 
(educational) playing setting?  

(cid:131)  The game 

(cid:131)  The math 

Is the game appreciated by the students? Are they engaged? Is it fun? Do they appreciate the 
mixed reality experience? Can the game be fruitfully embedded into education?  

Which concepts from mathematics (commonly taught in grades 7and 8) can be integrated into 
game? Do students recognize the math and do they feel they learned something?  

 
 
Before  the  pilot  and  its  results  are  discussed,  we  describe  the  design  and  the  game-play  of 
MobileMath.  
 
3. MobileMath 
3.1  The design and technical specifications 
MobileMath is designed to make mathematics more playful, engaging and real, by having students 
experience  mathematical  concepts  in  the  physical  world.    The  idea  for  its  design  was  born  when 
Mobile  phones  with  GPS  receivers  became  more  and  more  common.  In  the  summer  of  2007  the 
definitive version of MobileMath was developed in several meetings. The first meetings were used to 
define  the  design  criteria  by  a  team  specialised  in  math  education  and  educational  mobile 
applications. The team formulated four criteria for MobileMath:  

(cid:131)  The  game  should  focus  more  on  the  game  experience  than  on  the  educational  effects. 
Playing MobileMath should give students the feeling of playing a game, hence experiencing 
another way of doing mathematics. Geometry was seen as a suitable mathematical topic to 
address in a location-based game. 

(cid:131)  From previous projects it was known that it is challenging to make a game that online players 
and street players play at the same time. Therefore it was decided that the game could only 
be played outside and not online. In this way all players would have the same starting point 
and goal within the game. It was expected that this would result in more on site dynamics and 
interaction. A positive side effect was that operating Mobile Math would be independent from 
the digital facilities at schools. 

(cid:131)  The game should not be based on one specific location. We wanted the game to be played 
anywhere in the Netherlands and not just in for example Amsterdam. In this way every school 
could  play  the  game  in  their  own  direct  environment  and  would  not  be  excluded  as  had 
happened in the past with other mobile game applications.  

(cid:131)  The necessary preparation time of the teacher should be reduced to a minimum.  

Based on these four design criteria, MobileMath was developed. The aim of mobile math is for a team 
to  gain  points  by  creating  virtually  constructed  mathematical  shapes  (squares,  rectangles  or 
parallelograms).  They  do  so  by  walking  to  and  virtually  connecting  the  vertices  of  a  quadrilateral. 
When finished the quadrilateral is visible on the map on screen. Deconstructing quadrilaterals of other 
teams  is  part  of  the  game-play  of  MobileMath.  Deconstruction  is  realised  by  first  walking  to  and 
clicking on one of the vertices of the quadrilateral that is to be deconstructed and next clicking the 
midpoint  of  one  of  the  four  non-constructed,  thus  imaginary,  similarly  shaped  neighbouring 

quadrilaterals  (see  figure  1).  Determining  the  location  of  a  deconstruction  point  thus  requires  a 
mathematical construction. 

 
 

 
Figure 1: The four deconstruction points of the parallelogram in the centre. 
 
To support the process of constructing and deconstructing quadrilaterals auxiliary lines are visible on 
screen. A game website was build on which a game can be followed in real time online and on which 
the game data are stored and can be viewed back later. These data include the tracks of all teams, 
which are not visible during game-play on the phones, as well as the quadrilaterals that remain at the 
end of the game.  
A  pilot  with  the  designers  and  researchers  led  to  some  adjustments  in  the  technical  design.  The 
inaccuracy of the GPS readings while clicking vertices caused some frustration. This led to the idea of 
using an invisible underlying grid in the programme to which vertices would snap. A fixed 'margin' was 
build in the programme to be used when checking whether the quadrilaterals or the locations of the 
deconstruction points were indeed correct. Finally the possibility to restrict the size of the playing field 
was build in the programme. This was done to stimulate the interaction between the teams and to 
prevent teams from constructing an endless number of quadrilaterals, without ever encountering the 
other teams. 
 
3.2 The game-play 
Up  to  eight  teams  compete  on  the  playing  field  -  which  can  be  defined  anywhere.  Each  team  is 
equipped with a mobile phone with GPS-functionality, the playing field is visible as a circle on the map 
on the screen. Each team is given a colour and each team can choose their own team name. During 
the  game  all  teams  see  themselves  and  the  others  moving  in  real-time  in  the  playing  field  on  the 
underlying map.  
The objective of the game is to score as much points as possible within the space and time set for the 
game. Points are gained by covering area by constructing squares, rectangles or parallelograms on 
the  playing  field.  This  is  done  by  physically  walking  to  and  clicking  on  the  location  for  each  vertex 
(point). During the construction process walking back and forth in the physical world may be required 
to find the proper location for a vertex or for a deconstruction point. Zooming, in the virtual world on 
the map on screen, may be needed, either to see more detail (is this edge indeed perpendicular to 
that one?) or to see the whole shape (is this edge parallel to the one opposite?). If the fourth vertex 
finishes  a  shape  correctly,  it  appears  on  the  playing  field  in  the  colour  of  the  team,  otherwise  the 
shape will disappear. (see figure 2) 
 

 

 
Right: the shape will become opaque 

Wrong: the shape will disappear 

 
 
Figure 2: Finding the proper location of the fourth vertex 
 
The  score  is  proportional  to  the  area  covered  and  the  ratio  is  determined  by  the  type  of  shape 
(squares  are  hardest  to  construct,  parallelograms  are  easiest).  The  constructed  shapes  are  virtual 

elements  added  to  the  real  world  as  a  kind  of  'overlay'  (see  figure  3):  the  physical  world  has  thus 
become an interactive game board.  
 

 
 

 

 
Figure 3: View of a finished MobileMath game showing the quadrilaterals and the playing field. 
 
As  the  game  proceeds  teams  occupy territory  and thus  the  free  playing  space  gets smaller,  which 
provokes  interaction  between  competing  teams.  Since  the  shapes  cannot  overlap  it  is  possible  to 
'hinder' a team by trying to construct a shape within a shape under construction. Deconstruction of 
shapes clears space and the deconstructing team 'steals' half the points connected to that shape from 
the team that constructed it. The game ends after a set duration, the team with the highest score is 
the winner. 
 
4.  Methods 
To  answer  the  research  questions  a  sequence  of  pilots  was  set  up.  A  first  pilot  was  held  with  the 
teachers,  followed  by  three  pilots  with  students  at  three  different  schools.  In  all  pilots  researchers 
observed the team activities during the game and debriefed the teams afterwards. Observation notes 
were made and the game data were stored online. After they played the game all players completed a 
questionnaire.  
 
4.1 Pilot with teachers 
The  pilot  with  five  teachers,  one  geography,  three  mathematics  and  one  IT  teacher,  was  held  in 
January 2008. It had three objectives: to test the game-play with a group of ‘new’ players, to prepare 
for  the  pilots  with  students  and  to  discuss  and  co-design  how  to  embed  the  game-play  in  the 
educational setting.  
 
4.1.1 results 
The test outside with the teachers, each coupled with one of the researchers to form a team, worked 
well. Game-play was engaging, the technology worked well and the rules and goals were clear. The 
discussion afterwards in which the tracks were viewed and the strategies of the teams were discussed 
provided excellent opportunities for reflecting and making connections between game-strategies and 
aspects of mathematics (geometry and navigation and orientation) and geography (map skills).  
Based on the observations, a small questionnaire and the discussion afterwards it was decided that 
some  elements  needed  extra  attention  in  the  introduction  to  the  game,  these  included:  the 
mathematics involved in finding the deconstruction points, the inaccuracy of the GPS and the working 
of the grid and  the use of the map, which is not a conventional street map.  
The  educational  embedding  was  designed  in  the  form  of  materials  for  a  whole  class  introduction 
focusing  on  the  mathematics,  the  geography,  the  phone  and  the  game  play,  supported  with 
worksheets. Additionally an online evaluation survey for the students was designed. 
 
4.2 Pilots with students  
In March 2008 MobileMath was piloted at three schools with a total of 60 students, 54 of which filled in 
a questionnaire afterwards (see table 1). All pilots were observed by at least three researchers.  
 

 
 

Table 1: Overview of the pilots 
 

 

#students  grade  age male female voluntary? accompanied? 

School 1 
School 2 
School 3 

28 
12 
16 

7 
8 
8 

13 
14 
14 

17 
4 
11 

11 
8 
5 

no 
no 
yes 

yes 
no 
no 

 
4.2.1 organisation 
The pilots consisted of a whole class introduction, one round of game-play of 1 hour and a debriefing.  
Whole class introductions focused on map skills, characteristics of quadrilaterals, the game rules and 
the technology of the phone. In schools 1 and 2 both a math teacher and a geography teacher were 
involved. In school 3 the introduction was done by a mathematic teacher the day before the game 
was played. The technology part of the introduction was done by a designer-researcher. 
After  the  introduction  the students,  in  teams of  two,  played  the  game.  The  playing  filed  was  set  to 
have a radius of 1 kilometre, the duration of the game was set to be 1 hour. Because of the large 
number of students in the pilot in school 1 two games were played, each with a duration of 1 hour. 
Half of the students played the game outside, while the other half watched the game-play online in the 
computer room at school and kept a log of what (they thought) was happening.  
At school 1, for safety reasons, all outside teams were accompanied by a teacher or researcher. At 
the other schools the teams went on their own and the teachers and researchers followed the game 
online. After the round of game-play a debriefing session was held, using the stored game data and 
the observation notes, to reflect on the game-play. Notes were taken of the debriefingl. Two forms of 
debriefing were used: a debriefing session with each team upon its arrival back at school and a whole 
class debriefing session. At schools 1 and 2 both forms were used, at school 3 there was not enough 
time for a whole class debriefing.  
 
5. Results  
In this section we present results based on the observations, the stored game data and the questions 
from the questionnaire that relate to research questions discussed in this paper.  
 
5.1 Fun 
Students easily engaged in playing MobileMath and on the questionnaire rated it as ‘good fun’ (see 
table 2). 
 
Table 2: results on the question: 'did you enjoy playing the game?'. 
 

 

School 1 
School 2 
School 3 

Total 

1 

- 
- 
- 
- 

not at all

neutral

yes a lot

2 
no 
- 
- 
- 
- 

3 

2 
3 
- 
5 

4 
yes
10 
6 
9 
25 

5 

16 
3 
5 
24 

'average' 

4.5 
4.0 
4.4 
4.4 

 
The  bad  weather  during  the  pilot  at  school  2  had  a  negative  effect  on  the  score  for  fun,  this  was 
indicated  in  the  questionnaire  and  during  debriefing.  On  the  open  question  'give  reasons  for  your 
answer', a lot of different aspects were mentioned. Some students listed several reasons why they did 
or did not enjoy the game. These are summarized in table 3. 
 
Table 3: results on question: 'was the game fun?'. 
 

constructing or deconstructing (digital) shapes

answers 
just fun 

scoring points 

use GPS 

learn something 

walking and being outside 

fun, but tiring/bad weather/guided 

no reason 

#mentioned 

10 
11 
3 
3 
3 
3 
8 
4 

 
 

 
Sample  student  response:  "You  learn  to  use  GPS  and  you  learn  to  construct  different  shapes 
quadrilaterals, rectangles, etcetera and at the same time you play a game".  
 
5.2 Game-play 
Most students easily understood the goal and the rules of MobileMath. The students in school 1 who 
played the game in the second round and had seen the game being played by their classmates, did 
better than the students who played in the first round. In the first round the average score per team 
was 32 points, whereas in the second round this was 93 points. Observations revealed that the teams 
in this second round were more aware of each others locations, they were checking these more often 
and tried to imagine what the strategies of the other teams were. 
On the open question 'how was the collaboration within your team?' all students answered positively. 
They  indicated  that  the  collaboration  went  well:  they  helped  and  supported  each  other,  discussed 
strategies and took turns in controlling the phone.   
Not all students were aware of the importance of accuracy for the game-play. In two of the games 
there were teams that did not succeed in constructing of deconstructing a shape, as a consequence 
they scored no points. Six of the 32 teams that played MobileMath scored no points at all.  
 
5.3 The phone 
The  students  had  no  problems  using  the  phone.  Observations  showed  that  most  students  easily 
interacted  within  the  mixed  reality  environment.  One  team,  for  example,  placed  the  edge  they  just 
made on screen, parallel to the street to decide whether to go left or right. Some students however 
were  seen  to  have  problems  reading  and  interpreting  the  map  on  screen.  These  students  had 
difficulty orienting and combining the information from the physical world with the information from the 
map.  
 The technical features 'zooming' and 'checking the scores' were used by most students (see table 4). 
 
Table 4: results on the questions 'did you zoom?' and 'did you check the scores?'. 
 

Did you zoom in or out? 

Did you check the scores when playing?

 

yes no
44  10
50 
4 

 
Almost all students checked the scores frequently. Students who used the zoom-function  mentioned 
several reasons for doing so. They indicated to use zooming-in during the (de)construction process to 
check the accuracy. Zooming-out is used to get an overview; to see the location of all teams, and the 
shapes that have been constructed. It is also used to see their own location and plan the route. 
The  inaccuracy  of  the  GPS-readings,  combined  with  the  margins  set  and  the  snapping  to  the  grid  
proved to be frustrating for some of the teams. One team of school 2 tried to make a rectangle around 
the sports field. They were led by the lay-out in the physical world and their knowledge that the sports 
field is a rectangle. Due to a greater effect of the inaccuracy margin on larger shapes and students' 
limited  use  of  the  map  for  deciding  on the  accuracy  of    their  shape  under construction,  they  didn’t 
succeed  in  making  a  correct  shape  even  though  they  tried  three  times.  They  reasoned  in  the  real 
instead of in the virtual world, which proved to be unsuccessful. 
 
5.4 The construction process 
The stored  game  data,  especially  the  tracks  of  all  teams, show that  for  the construction  of  shapes 
different strategies were employed. One strategy is based on the (virtual) reality of the map. Students  
use elements from the map - like rectangular street patterns - to construct their quadrilaterals. Another 
strategy  is  to  use  knowledge  of  the  location  around  school  -  students  know  for  example  where  a 
rectangular playground is located. The third observed strategy is to make use of the visible elements 
in the physical world. Often students combine their experience in the physical world (the playing field), 
with  the  virtual  world  (on  the  map)  and  their  knowledge  about  the  environment.  Some  students 
constructed  their  quadrilaterals  as  free  standing  shapes,  only  focussing  on  the  mathematical 
properties.  
 
5.5 Learning 
The questionnaire had three questions related to learning and school subjects: 

(cid:131)  Did you learn something? Illustrate. 
(cid:131) 

Is this game related to geography? Is so, in what way? 

 
 

(cid:131) 

Is this game related to mathematics? Is so, in what way? 

Most  students  answered  they  had  learned  something  and  indicated  what  this  was.  The  results  are 
summarized in table 5.  
 
Table 5: results on the questions 'did you learn something?'  
 

 
no 

#mentioned

using the GPS 

constructing shapes

collaborating 

strategic thinking 
reading a map 
being accurate 
playing the game 

11 
13 
11 
5 
3 
3 
2 
2 

 
The large majority saw the relation to geography  in the use of the map or the GPS. Eight students 
saw no relation to geography. Three students saw no relation to mathematics. Most students specify 
the relation they see: shapes are mentioned by 31 students; 7 mention other geometrical terms like 
area,  angles  and  measurements;  calculating  (in  general)  is  mentioned  4  times  and  4  times  the 
calculation of scores is mentioned.  
 
6. Conclusions and discussion 
The pilots made clear that MobileMath can is an engaging game that can be played in an ordinary 
school  setting.  The  focus  has  been  on  the  playing  of  the  game.  Some  work  is  still  needed  to  fully 
exploit the potential of MobileMath for learning. The introduction and the debriefing session need to 
get more attention.  The debriefings sessions in the pilot were very short, but we could glimpse the 
possibilities these sessions have for reflecting on the game-play as well as on the math involved.  In 
this  section  we  discuss  the  three  aspects  of  the  central  research  question:  the  phone  (i.e.  the 
technology), the game and the math. 
 
6.1 The phone 
We can conclude that the technical environment of MobileMath is user-friendly and flexible enough to 
be used in an actual (educational) playing setting. As expected students easily used the functionality 
of  the  phones.  The  inaccuracy  of  the  GPS-readings  sometimes  interfered  with  and  frustrated  the 
game-play. For example: what looked like a  parallelogram on screen was identified by the game as 
being a rectangle or a seemingly correctly placed vertex was evaluated to be wrong. Schwabe (2005) 
in his research on a mobile game discussed this type of effects of (in)accuracy and concluded that for 
tasks  that  ask  for  finding  very  specific  locations  the  inaccuracy  can  cause  frustration  and  loss  of 
interest in the game task. Other more 'accurate' location technologies may be preferred in that case. 
For MobileMath we need to reconsider the margins and the grid size build into the software.  
 
6.2 The game 
The results from the pilots proved that MobileMath was highly appreciated by the students. The gameplay 
engaged and motivated students. Two girls even leaped over a ditch to overcome the physical 
barriers of the location to finish their shape. Students enjoyed playing the game and would have liked 
to play it again. From the fact that students mention different aspects that contributed to the fun, we 
can  conclude  that  with  the  design  of  Mobile  Math  we  succeeded  in  creating  a  rich  and  interesting 
gaming and learning environment.  
One of the design decisions was to have no online players in the game. This seems to be a good 
decision:  in  the  game  all  teams  are  equal.  On  the  other  hand  we  saw  that  the  game  played  by 
students  who  had  first  watched  a  round  of  game-play  online,  was  much  faster,  more  exciting  and 
interactive.  Watching  the  game  obviously  helped  future  players  to  get  a  clearer  idea  about  what 
strategy to follow. This result may be used to better integrate the game in the educational setting. 
The deconstruction option had the teams interact with one another which made the game even more 
exciting. This interaction mainly took place in the virtual reality. The teams spotted each other more 
easily on screen, than in the physical reality.  The mix between the physical and the virtual reality is 
an  important  aspect  of  MobileMath.  It  has  a  different  character  than  in  most  enhanced  reality 
simulations.  In  MobileMath  the  virtual  reality  is  added  to  the  game  only  when  teams  construct  the 
quadrilaterals. This virtual reality remains available in the stored game data. When reviewed later, the 

 
 

virtual  reality  of  the  quadrilaterals  and  the  tracks  on  the  map,  can  become  the  reality  of  the 
educational setting. In the next phase of the research on MobileMath we plan to focus more on the 
effects of the use of mixed reality on interaction and learning. 
 
6.3 The math 
With the design of MobileMath we have demonstrated that we can successfully integrate mathematics 
into  an engaging  mobile  location-aware  game.  We designed  the  math  to  be an  integral part  of  the 
game-play. Students engage in the math when they (de)construct quadrilaterals. Math skills are also 
needed  when  a  team  studies  the  map  and  decides  on  a  strategy  related  to  their  position:  which 
distances can be covered walking; where can a correct shape fit; can each vertex be reached? how 
long  will  the  construction  process  take?  Although  students  report  they  learned  something  and  can 
name aspects of the math involved we cannot yet support the claim that MobileMath has a learning 
effect. The fact that in MobileMath students experience mathematics to be engaging may in itself be 
seen as a positive result. We end with a statement made by one of the students that reflects how the 
math has become experientially real by playing the game: "Yes, the game relates to math; with these 
shapes  it  is  funny,  it  is  like  you  are  the  ruler  yourself".  For  this  student MobileMath  has  proven  its 
value. 
 
Acknowledgements   
We would like to express our thanks to: 

the teachers of the pilot schools;  
their students who enthusiastically played MobileMath; 

• 
• 
•  our colleagues of the design team. 

 
References 
Admiraal, W., Raessens, J. and Van Zeijts, H. (2007) "Technology enhanced learning through mobile 
technology in secondary education", In P. Cunningham and M. Cunningham (Eds.) Expanding the 
knowledge economy. Issues, applications, case studies (Part 2) (pp. 1241-1248). IOS Press, 
Amsterdam. 
De Souza e Silva, A. and Delacruz, G. C. (2006) "Hybrid reality games reframed: Potential uses in 
educational contexts", Games and Culture, 2006(1), 231-253. 
Demeyer, T. , Hopman, A., Jonker, V., Kerstens, K., and Wijers, M. (2008) "MobileMath" [online],   
Retrieved May 15, 2008, from http://www.mobilemath.nl/ 
DeVane, B., Squire, K. and  Durga, S. (2008) "Centers of Expertise for Academic Learning Through 
Open-Ended Video Games", Paper presented at the International Conference of the Learning 
Sciences (ICLS), Utrecht, The Netherlands, from http://www.fi.uu.nl/en/icls2008/575/paper575.pdf 
Egenfeldt-Nielsen, S. (2005) Beyond Edutainment: Exploring the Educational Potential of Computer 
Games., IT-university, Kopenhagen. 
Gee, J. (2003). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy, Palgrave Macmillan, 
New York. 
Gravemeijer, K. P. E. (1994) Developing realistic mathematics education, CDbeta press, Utrecht. 
Lave, J. and Wenger, E. (1991) Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, England. 
O'Donnell, A., Hmelo-Silver, C. and Erkens, G. (Eds.)  (2005)  Collaborative learning, reasoning, and 
technology, LawrenceErlbaum Associates, Mahwah, NJ. 
O’Malley, C., Vavoula, G., Glew, J. P., Taylor, J., Sharples, M., and Lefrere, P. (2003)  Guidelines for 
learning/teaching/tutoring in a mobile environment, MOBIlearn/Giunt, Ricerca, Italy. 
Schwabe, G., and Göth, C. (2005) "Mobile Learning with a Mobile Game: Design and Motivational 
Effects", Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 21, 204-216. 
Shaffer, D. W. (2006) How computer games help children learn, Palgrave Macmillan, New York. 
Squire, K. (2008) "Designing Place-Based Augmented Reality Games for Literacy", Paper presented 
at the International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS), Utrecht, The Netherlands. from 
http://www.fi.uu.nl/en/icls2008/570/paper570.pdf 
Squire, K., and Klopfer, E. (2007) " Augmented Reality Simulations on Handheld Computers", Journal 
of the learning sciences, 16(3), 371-413. 
Winters, N. (2007) "What is mobile learning?", In M. Sharples (Ed.) Big issues in mobile learning (pp. 
7-12). LSRI, Nottingham. 

  

