Journal of Universal Computer Science, vol. 22, no. 10 (2016), 1277-1297
submitted: 28/2/16, accepted: 2/9/16, appeared: 1/10/16 © J.UCS

Crowdsourcing and Co-curation in 

Virtual Museums: A Practice-driven Approach 

Daniel Biella 

(University of Duisburg-Essen, Germany 

daniel.biella@uni-due.de) 

Thomas Pilz 

(Gymnasium Horkesgath Krefeld, Germany 

thomas.pilz@googlemail.com) 

Daniel Sacher 

(University of Duisburg-Essen, Germany 

daniel.sacher@uni-due.de) 

Benjamin Weyers 

(RWTH Aachen, Germany 
weyers@vr.rwth-aachen.de) 

Wolfram Luther 

(University of Duisburg-Essen, Germany 

wolfram.luther@uni-due.de) 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

(Department of Computer Science, University of Chile, Santiago de Chile, Chile 

Nelson Baloian 

nbaloian@dcc.uchile.cl) 

Tobias Schreck 

(Graz University of Technology, Graz, Austria 

tobias.schreck@cgv.tugraz.at) 

 
Abstract: This paper gives an overview on crowdsourcing and co-curation practices in virtual 
museums. Engaged nonprofessionals and specialists support curators in creating digital 2D or 
3D  exhibits,  exhibitions  and  tour  planning  and  in  the  enhancement  of  metadata  using  the 
Virtual  Museum  and  Cultural  Object  Exchange  Format  (ViMCOX).  ViMCOX  is  based  on 
international  Lightweight  Information  Describing  Objects  (LIDO)  v1.0  metadata  standard, 
provides  the  semantic  structure of  exhibitions  and  complete  museums  and  includes new  features,
 such as room and outdoor design, interactions with artwork, path planning and dissemination.
 Various application examples show the impact of crowdsourcing, co-creation and cocuration 
on the digitalization of expositions in classical museums and on the creation of virtual 
museums. The case studies are devoted to restoring lost or damaged artwork by the GermanJewish 
 sculptor  Leopold  Fleischhacker,  high-quality  3D  shapes  and  Armenian  cross  stones. 
Finally,  the  paper  reports  on  an  evaluation  in  the  field  of  usability,  user  interfaces  and  the 
crowd’s willingness to undertake various co-curation subtasks. 
 
Keywords:  Crowdsourcing,  co-curation,  virtual  museum,  use  cases,  evaluation,  standardized 
metadata, ViMEDEAS, ViMCOX 
Categories: H.5, J.5, L.1, L.3, L.6 

1278

Biella D., Pilz T., Sacher D., Weyers B., Luther W., Baloian N., Schreck T. ...

1 

 Introduction and Motivation 

Crowdsourcing and co-creation are major players in an emerging field of research on 
collaborative systems. The technologies available nowadays, such as smartphones and 
social networks, enable people to provide and consume information in ways that were 
never possible before. In this paper, we explore how crowdsourcing and co-curation 
activities  can  be  used  in  virtual  museums  (VMs)  by  creating  and  visiting  virtual 
exhibits in various use cases. The main goal of this proposed extension of VMs is a 
taxonomy  of  the  various  subtasks  in  digital  co-curation  activities  provided  by  the 
crowd or by people directly involved in the project. Based on this taxonomy, it is possible 
to identify necessary tool support and advice by curators and software engineers.   
[Biella  06]  provides  a  comprehensive  literature  review  that  describes  various 
kinds  of  VMs  as  digital  heritage  content,  including  virtual  exhibits  of  replicated 
historical  laboratories  for  the  purpose  of  study,  education,  and  leisure.  VMs  and 
exhibits  need  digital  reconstruction  and  interpretation  of  existing  or  lost  artwork  as 
well  as  their  metadata.  The  content  can  be  deduced  from  existing  items,  photos, 
drawings  or  descriptions  in  books,  oral  tradition,  expert  knowledge  or  available 
metadata and recorded in a standardized metadata format. The digital representations 
of  the  artwork  are  then  placed  into  a  spatiotemporal  context  realized  as  indoor  or 
outdoor  exhibition  space.  They  are  hyperlinked  to  context-related  information  that 
will  help  visitors  comprehend  the  digital  interpretation.  Furthermore,  through 
interaction  with  objects,  displayed  or  spoken  texts,  thematic  tours  and  electronic 
catalogues or tour movies, visitors can convey ideas and concepts. As a data format, 
the VM  metadata standard ViMCOX  was developed in order to provide a semantic 
structure for exhibits and complete museums [Biella 12]. It is based on international 
metadata standards and uses LIDO v1.0 as its interchange and harvesting format for 
cultural  objects.  Roughly  speaking,  ViMCOX  addresses  the  above-mentioned 
features, allows work-related information to be included in the spatial and temporal 
context and enables the flexible, scalable generation of 3D scenes. Discussions with 
curators of modern museums hosting various kinds of collections, showed that a VM 
metadata standard is also expected to support the following features [Biella 10, 15]:  
  Description  of  requirements  concerning  the  presentation  of  exhibits  and  an 
adequate  context  (carrier,  wall,  room,  lighting,  outdoor  area  with  requirements 
concerning environment, various types of landscapes…);  

  Specification  of  interactive  and  animated  construction  methods  via  adequate 
interfaces, which allows visitors to modify and return items to their original state; 
  Modification of exhibits with regard to position, form and content, including the 

creation of new, enhanced instances of one or more cultural objects;  

  An  interactive  canvas  for  controlling  a  simulation  defined  by  a  discrete  or 

continuous process model. 
Digital curation (cf. Digital Curation Center, http://www.dcc.ac.uk/) is the maintenance 
 of  digital  research  data  throughout  its  lifecycle:  re-usability  of  metadata, 
surrogates and other media or digital assets. This includes the development of trusted 
digital  repositories  to  acquire,  preserve  and  disseminate  curated  data  within  the 
community. The activities still concern the definition of guidelines and workflows for 
purposes such as digitization, documentation, presentation, transfer and preservation, 
interoperability, encoding formats, standards, compliant vocabularies, tool chains, and 

Biella D., Pilz T., Sacher D., Weyers B., Luther W., Baloian N., Schreck T. ...

1279

services.  These  workflows  also  define  the  transformation  and  combination  of 
artworks to create new instances. Challenges in digital curation include documenting 
provenance  and  applying  digital  rights  management  (DRM)  and  transfer  of 
ownership, but also the detection of malicious crowdsourcing workers, especially in 
the context of museums dedicated to victims of crimes against humanity [Wang 14]. 

that  eases 

Using content produced by crowdsourcing or by co-curation projects requires an 
the 
appropriate  online  platform  provided  by  software  engineers 
transformation  of  3D  models  and  metadata  into  the  right  formats  and  supports  the 
crowd  with  curating  tools  and  standard  sheets  for  metadata  following  international 
standards.  In  earlier  papers,  we  described  the  framework  Replicave  developed  by 
[Biella 06] in 2006, which provides a cost-effective way to create virtual exhibits by 
reusing 3D models and generating digital content dynamically. Its successor Replicave2,
  developed by  [Sacher  13],  uses  X3D  and  X3DOM  as  rendering  platforms  and 
Java  EE  and  the  Tomcat  servlet  container  to  present  exhibits  online.  These  virtual 
environments  can  be  created  using  customizable  exhibition  area  templates,  such  as 
entrance  halls,  galleries,  media  rooms  and  additional  interactive  experiments. 
Furthermore,  the  use  of  such  standardized  formats  offer  compatibility  to  fully 
immersive  systems  such  as  a  CAVE  [Sacher  15].  The  multipurpose  system 
ViMEDEAS  allows  dynamic  generation  and  publication  of  arbitrary  room  designs 
and  generates  virtual  museum  environments  in  line  with  given  parameters  and 
metadata designs specified in the VM modeling language ViMCOX.  

The main contribution of this paper is to present a concept that focuses on content 
development and enhancement realized by participatory practices and crowdsourcing, 
especially for Web-based museums and virtual science centers, which is based on the 
above presented technologies (cf. Figure 1). 

 

Figure 1: Participatory co-curating approach for creating, enhancing and 

disseminating VMs 

The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces related work and focuses 
on the role of co-curation in Galleries, Libraries, Archives and Museums (GLAMs). 
Section  3  shows  how  participative  co-curation  techniques  are  embedded  in  the 
creation  and  visiting  process  of  VMs.  Section  4  reviews  recent  progress  and  open 

 

1280

Biella D., Pilz T., Sacher D., Weyers B., Luther W., Baloian N., Schreck T. ...

problems in the  field of co-curation, and Section 5 explores case studies of various 
types  of  exhibitions.  Initial  evaluation  results  on  visitors’  usability  issues  and  cocuration 
 activities  are  presented  in  Section  6.  Finally,  Section  7  introduces  a  new 
participative  project. This  article  is  an  updated  and  expanded  version  of  our  LNCS 
4036  proceedings  contributions  to  the  15th  CRIWG  meeting  in  Yerevan,  Armenia, 
September  22–25,  2015.  Additionally,  we  include  material  from  [Biella  15,  Sacher 
15].  [Sacher  15]  defines  a  workﬂow  for  planning,  realizing,  presenting  and 
documenting real and virtual museums with the aid of domain experts, developers and 
users.  Design  decisions  and  workﬂow  execution  accompany  a  literature  review, 
collected  survey  data  sets,  and  discussions  with  the  stakeholders  involved  in  the 
development  and  use  of  virtual  museums.  This  material  also  addresses  these 
stakeholders' individual needs. 

2 

From Crowdsourcing to Co-curation 

The term crowdsourcing—a portmanteau of crowd and outsourcing—was coined by 
Jeff  Howe  and  Mark  Robinson,  who  discuss  it  at  length  in  [Howe  06],  the  Wired 
magazine article entitled ‘The Rise of Crowdsourcing’. They define crowdsourcing as 
“the act of a company or institution taking a function once performed by employees 
and outsourcing it to an undefined (and generally large) network of people in the form 
of an open call. This can take the form of peer-production (when the job is performed 
collaboratively),  but  is  also  often  undertaken  by  sole  individuals.  The  crucial 
prerequisite  is  the  use  of  the  open  call  format  and  the  large  network  of  potential 
laborers.”  

People spend hundreds of millions of hours in crowdsourcing activities on social 
platforms,  affecting  social  interaction,  and  on  Wikipedia  projects,  installing  new 
forms  of  content  fostering,  knowledge  generation  and  problem  solving,  which 
complements familiar practices of collaboration and co-creation. It is only natural that 
GLAMs are exploring the potential of crowdsourcing and developing new models of 
participation [see Oomen and Aroyo 11]. In doing so, they identify critical challenges 
to the successful deployment of crowdsourcing in the digital content life cycle related 
to semantic web and linguistic technologies as well as to data quality. 

[Ridge 13] argues that crowdsourcing projects should be “a platform for audience 
engagement with museums, offering truly deep and valuable connection with cultural 
heritage  through  online  collaboration  around  shared  goals”.  She  summarizes  recent 
experiences as contributions of the public toward a shared, significant goal or research 
area where achievements provide only inherent rewards for participation. She noticed 
a certain “discomfort of cultural heritage and academic institutions with the perceived 
threat of replacing digitization and research staff  with volunteers”. Ridge advocates 
design  techniques  drawn  from  casual  game  design  and  scaffolding  theory  by 
providing  “clear  roles  and  information  about  how  to  participate”.  Increasing 
participation  starts  with  attention  to  content,  collaborative  creation  of  items, 
organization of resources for content creation and, finally, production of content with 
public impact. 

Many websites, including Wikipedia, Open Street Map and Second Life, illustrate 
important examples of crowdsourcing. We will not enter into a deep discussion about 
the differences between crowdsourcing and various forms  of collaborative works in 

Biella D., Pilz T., Sacher D., Weyers B., Luther W., Baloian N., Schreck T. ...

1281

VM and will summarize only some of the opinions found on the web. As [Benson 13] 
observes, “co-creation is a collaborative initiative which operates like crowdsourcing 
by  seeking  information  and  ideas  from  a  group  of  people.  There  is,  however,  one 
crucial difference. The call for contributions is not put to an open forum or platform 
but to a smaller group of individuals with specialized skills and talents.” [Adams 13] 
cites  various  contributions  defining  co-creation  and  works  out  similarities  and 
differences: “Co-creation differs from crowdsourcing by the depth and richness of the 
relationship between the brand and participating consumers”. [Boon 11] focuses on 
co-creation in the history of science and technology, underlines the huge groundswell 
of  public  enthusiasm  for  history  in  general  and  explains:  "Co-curation  and  similar 
techniques gathered together under the umbrella of ‘participation’ describe a range of 
practices  in  which  lay  people  work  to  develop  displays  and  programs  within 
museums."  [Oomen  11]  lists  three  major  models  of  participation  also  suitable  as  a 
categorization of projects designed by professionals in the cultural heritage domain: 
Members of the crowd contribute data in Contributory Projects; they contribute and 
analyze data, help in refining project design, or disseminate findings in Collaborative 
Projects;  and  they  contribute  and  work  together  in  Co-created  Projects.  Some 
participants are actively involved in more than one step in the process. An example of 
this is described in [Echavarria12]. People in local communities were invited to take 
photographs of the objects in the collection of public monuments and sculptures in the 
city  of  Brighton  and  Hove  in  the  United  Kingdom  at  different  times  and  from 
different  perspectives.  This  contributory  project  enables  users  to  upload  all  the 
provenance  data  of  the  3D  shapes,  such  as  source  images,  acquisition  details  and 
processing stages. 

[Biella 15] cites various papers that discuss how crowdsourcing improves Web3D 
user navigation. 3D interactions with items are collected to identify regions of interest 
(ROIs), which are then used to generate recommendations for subsequent users. An 
electronic  guestbook  allows  visitors  to  contribute  information  to  the  artwork  by 
responding to a predefined question for each individual section. It may even open up 
interaction between communities of active participants. 

 [Carletti 13] conducted a web survey on 36 crowdsourcing projects promoted by 
GLAMs. The authors provide classification for crowdsourcing tasks akin to common 
curator tasks (selecting, classifying, describing, maintaining) and public participation 
models, which was proposed by Oomen and Aroyo [Oomen 11]: 
  Classification—gathering  descriptive  metadata  related 

to  an  object 

in  a 

collection; 

  Contextualization—telling stories or writing articles about the objects; 
  Collection integration/completion; 
  Co-curation—using  the  inspiration/expertise  of  non-professional  curators  to 

 

create (web exhibitions); 

  Crowdfunding—collective cooperation to support efforts initiated by others. 

In  conclusion,  there  are  several  proposals  in  the  literature  that  support  the 
construction  and  operation  of  VMs  and  exhibits  by  crowdsourcing  and  co-curation 
activities. However, what is missing is a complete taxonomy of such activities and a 
coherent architectural approach that offers tools providing feedback information from 
crowdsourcing to the creation process of virtual museums.  

1282

Biella D., Pilz T., Sacher D., Weyers B., Luther W., Baloian N., Schreck T. ...

3 

Supporting Curators through Co-curation 

A Classification of Co-curation Activities 

3.1 
Based on this observation and our own experiences, we next focus on a classification 
of co-curation activities for museums and exhibits. The following factors are key in 
the participatory approach (cf. Figure 1): 
  There are three important stages in supporting curators building expositions and 

visitors exploring VMs through crowdsourcing and co-curation: 
o  Online creation, contribution or enhancement of digital 2D/3D exhibits and 

its metadata; 

o  Proposal  and  publication  of  tours  on  the  museum’s  platform,  including 
navigation  in  the  3D  environment  to  predefined  or  individually  specified 
viewpoints and interaction with exhibits to create private digital instances as 
defined in ViMCOX; 

o  Online discussion of artwork, proposition and creation of additional content 
and  appropriate  context  using  a  suitable  platform,  such  as  an  electronic 
guestbook.  It  can  be  suitable  to  invite  visitors  to  use  their  smartphones  to 
take photos and comment on the exhibit.  

  Two types of human capital are involved: 

o  Volunteers are motivated and have appropriate knowledge to contribute; 
o  People working in house—curators and software engineers—gather material, 
execute  quality  control  and  integrate  exhibits  and  metadata  into  the  VM 
using a VM metadata standard like ViMCOX and applying a DRM strategy. 
An adequate communication platform is needed, including download and upload 
facilities that spread information to the public and collect digitized objects, metadata 
and copyright transfer agreements. It is also imperative that software engineers enable 
semi-automatic transformation to standardized datatypes and quality control.  

Motivation is a further issue as is stated by [Oomen 11],  [Ridge 13]: users engage 
in crowdsourcing  for extrinsic or intrinsic  motivations:  for the public, these include 
fun, pleasure in hobbies, enjoyment in learning, competition, practicing existing skills 
and mastering new ones, passion for the subject and mutual recognition; for experts, it 
is  important  to  attract  loyal  coworkers.  The  authors  also  mention  two  clusters  of 
motivational factors: social connectedness and membership, sharing and generosity.  
In  most cases, the artwork is copyrighted and curators are requested to adopt a 
high  quality  DRM.  Thus,  building  and  operating  a  VM  requires  the  cooperation  of 
several stakeholders. Volunteers and visitors are invited and encouraged to contribute 
to  the  exhibition  and  sign  off  on  copyright  agreements  prohibiting  abusive  use  and 
distribution of digital artwork. The owners of the artwork must grant permission for 
the  creation  of  digital  3D  representations  and  their  dissemination  under  certain 
conditions,  such  as  watermarking  the  exhibit  and  displaying  copyright  information 
concerning  limitation  of  use  and  propagation.  Curators  provide  metadata  and 
exposition  layouts,  which  are  also  part  of  the  copyright  agreement.  They  create 
appropriate  blanks  conforming  to  a  given  XML  schema  through  which  to  gather 
artworks’  metadata.  Software  engineers  organize 
the  creation  of  digital 
representations together with their metadata, install protection and build a VM, which 

Biella D., Pilz T., Sacher D., Weyers B., Luther W., Baloian N., Schreck T. ...

1283

is hosted on a server, kiosk system or other appropriate platform (cf. Figure 1 and the 
left side of Figure 8).  

Leading  museums  abstain  from  watermarking  and  use  the  Open  Archives 
Initiative  Protocol  for  Metadata  Harvesting  (OAI-PMH).  As  mentioned  in  [Sacher 
13],  the  Yale  Center  for  British  Art  (YCBA)  and  the  Rijksmuseum  release  highresolution 
images, thumbnails and metadata of their collections and artworks licensed 
under  creative  commons  and  public  domain  licenses  using  OAI-PMH.  The 
Rijksmuseum  releases  metadata  records  as  Dublin  Core  data  sets,  and  the  YCBA 
collection metadata is available in the LIDO format. 

Supporting  Curators  through  Co-curation:  Creating  Reconstructed 

3.2 
Exhibits 
As  discussed  in  the  introduction  and  literature  review,  crowdsourcing  can  have 
various benefits for the generation and curation of VMs and their exhibits. It can offer 
concepts and ideas, 3D models, metadata and work context information. One of the 
most cogent arguments for crowdsourcing digital 3D models is that generating them 
involves high costs; with crowdsourcing, these models can be visualized and stored or 
exported  together  with  appropriate  textures  to  modern  3D  printers.  Similarly,  an 
appropriate DRM can be used to combine community contributions to administrative 
and descriptive metadata with technical and use metadata provided by the institution. 
Although  high-quality  3D  modeling  is  a  task  for  specialists,  involving  engaged 
volunteers  can  help  reduce  costs.  Volunteer  involvement  can  be  supported  by 
software based on game consoles and open-source modeling software (e.g., low-cost 
3D  scanning  and  modeling  with  MS  Kinect  and  ReconstructMe  or  high  quality 
scanning with Artec and visualization using NVIDIA Quadro stereo techniques). The 
workers contribute metadata by respecting XML-based standards as developed for use 
case 2 [see Section 5.2 below]. However, in the museum community and especially 
for curators and software engineers, there are no simple solutions because a great deal 
of  preand 
 post-processing  is  necessary  and  comfortable  interfaces  are  scarce. 
Generally,  reconstructing  software  includes  a  viewer  or  editor  that  allows  users  to 
inspect or repair and annotate the 3D shapes. The results are afterwards stored in the 
exhibition repository and can be searched and selected within their local and temporal 
context using keywords from descriptive metadata [Biella 15].  

As  reported  in  most  3D  scanning  forums,  one  of  two  scanning  principles  is 
typically implemented: cameras or lasers moving around the object or a fixed camera 
setup with objects revolving on a turning table. Other image-based approaches are the 
Arc  3D  web  service  (arc3d.be/)  and  the  proprietary  123D  Catch  approach  from 
Autodesk  (www.123dapp.com/catch),  which  allows  3D  digitization  using  modern 
smartphones. A comparative overview on existing models is provided in [Straub 14], 
who  discuss  multiple  applications  for  3D  scanning,  modeling  and  printing  and 
provide  an  overview  of  future  directions  for  this  technology,  such  as  3D  video 
capture. To create the 3D model from the image data, several software packages can 
be utilized to produce a triangulated surface or a mesh object and to process the color 
information of the object being scanned. 

On the curator’s side, post-processing is done by the VM staff on workstations or 
in a reduced form on mobile devices. An enhanced platform provides automatic postprocessing 
 facilities  together  with  a  Web-based  interface  for  entering  the  2D/3D 

1284

Biella D., Pilz T., Sacher D., Weyers B., Luther W., Baloian N., Schreck T. ...

content,  metadata  and  copyright  information.  Engineers  must  define  a  versatile 
hardware  environment  to  host  the  exhibition,  for  instance,  a  kiosk  system  with  a 
modified operation mode prohibiting unauthorized user actions and an adequate user 
interface supporting user navigation, interaction, text input and multilingual text and 
speech output and logging functionalities. Clear software requirements, standardized 
data  formats  and  the  use  of  the  Creative  Commons  Attribution  Share  Alike 
International  License 
(CC  BY-SA  4.0,  https://creativecommons.org/licenses/) 
approved  for  free  cultural  work  to  share  original  works  of  authorship  and  other 
content facilitate seamless integration of contributed content. 

Enhancing  Exhibitions  through  Co-curation:  Collaborative  Knowledge 

3.3 
Creation and Management 
There are several ways to collect knowledge or information during or after a user’s 
visit through communication or voting tools and interaction interfaces, which may be 
integrated into the VM or accessed separately. Important means are input forms for 
entering text or formatted metadata, special-purpose interfaces for interacting with the 
exhibit  and  electronic  guestbook  where  users  can  comment  on  the  exhibit  or  ask 
questions about particular items. Typical information concerns the personal data that 
help define user groups and their interests: (virtual) museums, categories of exhibits, 
and artists and their epochs. User comments tend to concern museum and exposition 
design, presentation of the exhibits and complementary information, quality of digital 
exhibit and metadata, reports of erroneous or missing information or technical flaws, 
system  handling  and  usability.  They  address  free  navigation  and  guided  tours, 
facilities  for  communicating  with  the  curator,  technical  staff  or  other  visitors  and 
means  of  interaction,  degree  of  immersion,  and  modern  interfaces,  such  as  multitouch 
tables.  

In the following list, we summarize the most relevant activities in correlation with 
visitors’  input.  Most  visitors’  contributions  concerning  modifications  of  the  exhibit 
and  exhibition  design  via  interaction  are  relevant  to  section  3.2  much  as  the  spiral 
model is applied in software engineering. 
  Correcting/enhancing or completing exhibits, metadata or the technical platform. 
Visitors  are  invited  to  ask  questions  and  to  provide  information  via  various 
communication channels, such as completing questionnaires, signing electronic guest 
books or writing emails; 
 

Identifying areas of interest to support the curator in exhibition planning. 
User actions, such as approaching an exhibit, turning objects and zooming in on 
certain features, are recorded and evaluated. This provides information about further 
enhancement  of  the  digitized  3D  object  and  users’  navigation  in  these  areas,  helps 
determine user groups and navigation behavior and enables assessment of interesting 
exhibition areas or frequently targeted areas using heat maps that display the results of 
a  cluster  analysis.  They  are  also  used  to  determine  which  exhibition  areas  are  less 
frequently visited and to detect design flaws; 
  Modifying the exhibit when interaction is provided. 

As described in [Biella 10], visual objects can be inspected and scrutinized from 
various vantage points, and the user can modify an object’s position, exposition and 
appearance.  Geometric  objects  can  be  moved  or  rotated,  superposed,  scaled  or 
modified,  cloned,  or  made  invisible.  Scene  graph–based  languages  support  the 

Biella D., Pilz T., Sacher D., Weyers B., Luther W., Baloian N., Schreck T. ...

1285

deconstruction  of  an  object  into  its  various  parts  and,  in  a  different  way,  even  its 
reconstruction  from  its  parts.  Thus,  visitors  become  creators  of  multiple  new 
representations of an artwork; 
  Creating appropriate context/placing objects in a context. 

Visitors navigate within the exposition by moving through different viewpoints or 
clicking inside an exhibit area, watch metadata activating information frames, look at 
collections  of  similar  items,  comment  on  the  exhibit  in  a  virtual  guestbook,  make 
annotations, and cite related work; 
  Building 

their  own  exposition,  publishing 

tours/storytelling/disseminating 

information. 
To support the visitor or user, the VM or exhibit should be hosted on a versatile 
technical platform and displayed via high-performance software tools. Unfortunately, 
most  Web  browser  plugins  that  visualize  virtual  environments  do  not  provide 
meaningful  server  logs  or  data  to  reconstruct  visitors’  tours  and  point-and-click 
navigation. A visitor moving in an HTML5/X3DOM scenario facilitates logging the 
position, determining proximity to an exhibit, orientation and walk direction as well 
as jumping to another room via a door connector or a teleporter to produce a sort of 
camera replay. Also, dwell time in front of the exhibit and clicks performed to access 
metadata  and  other  material  can  be  recorded.  At  the  entrance,  during  the  visit  or 
before leaving, visitors can provide information about themselves and their interests, 
comment or access the entire exhibit or parts of it. A statistical evaluation of specific 
user  group  walks  makes  available  transition  matrices,  average  dwell  time  and 
engagement.  These  data  can  help  identify  areas  of  interest  (cf.  list  of  visitors’ 
contributions  above),  develop  favorite  tours  and  publish  series  of  pictures  together 
with context and stories surrounding tour highlights. However, using a solution with a 
browser plugin requires additional effort to collect user input, record viewpoints and 
sojourn  time,  measure  engagement  and  support  tour  publishing  or  storytelling  in 
accordance with DRM.  

One  interesting  question  is  how  museum  staff  can  encourage  visitors  to 
participate. We propose awarding participation by providing users with extra features; 
these might include electronic catalogues, opportunities to assess the exhibit or upload 
additional material, or ways to publish on the museum platform or recommend their 
tour. Which instruments are most suitable will be further evaluated in one of our use 
cases.  

For the second use case, which is presented in the next section, we opted for the 
kiosk system solution, which supports free exploration and guided tours based on the 
European legislation, which allows collection material to be made digitally available 
to  individual  members  of  the  public  through  a  closed  network  and  within  a  special 
exhibition context for the purpose of research or private study [Dierickx 05].  

Supporting  Co-curation:  Recent  Progress  and  Open 

4 
Problems  

In recent years, the authors and their collaborators have concentrated their research on 
the  development  of  a  viable  VM  standard,  ViMCOX,  in  the  context  of  existing 
standards such as LIDO, the realization of the multipurpose system ViMEDEAS and 

1286

Biella D., Pilz T., Sacher D., Weyers B., Luther W., Baloian N., Schreck T. ...

smaller editors to design and generate virtual 3D and 2D museum environments and 
to publish and archive virtual exhibition layouts.  

On the digitizing side, one area that must be addressed is existing exhibitions with 
paintings  and  3D  artifacts  to  be  scanned.  [Hopmann  13]  has  created  a  software 
Mobile  Object  Catcher  to  support  curators  and  volunteers  in  digitizing  existing 
museum rooms using a camera to measure the room photogrammetrically; it runs on a 
smartphone with either an Android or a Windows Phone operating system. The tool 
records  a  complete  room  design  and  creates  metadata  in  the  ViMCOX  standard 
(<vimcox:rooms>,  <vimcox:objects>)  in  order  to  reconstruct  the  room  in  X3D 
language using photos, including its windows, doors and other items as well as their 
sizes  and  positions.  The  user  furnishes  the  width  of  a  wall  and  the  wall  angles. 
Finally, the metadata file is saved and can be sent by mail to another user. The tool 
was developed with the open source developer tool PhoneGap, which allows crossplatform 
 solutions.  The  precision  strongly  depends  on  the  screen  resolution  and 
guarantees  an  absolute  error  of  ±0.6%.  [Yaslar  13]  describes  a  workflow  to 
reconstruct  3D  masks  by  using  photographs  as  texture  for  a  3D  model  reproduced 
from  scanner  data  (i.e.  MS  Kinect  as  a  head  scanner)  and  using  Blender 
reconstruction software.  

the content created. These tools include the following features: 
  Similarity criteria to rate object fidelity and the means to clarify its provenance; 
  Metadata that meets the standards; 
  Decision support about the use and integration of crowd contributions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Our approach also includes various ways to design and realize outdoor areas with 
typical landscape characteristics. Furthermore, we developed an application for use by 
the  3D  museum  designer  as  a  management  tool  for  editing  3D  objects  within  a 
graphical  user  interface,  including  real-time  adjustment  of  their  size,  location  and 
orientation and the creation of 3D light sources for the scene. This information can be 
saved in a standardized document file format.  

To summarize, the co-curation process starts by first preparing, then visiting the 
exhibit and, finally, identifying already completed work and important issues yet to be 
dealt with. The main challenges in this process include the automatic generation of  
 

a specific call defining the task, the qualifications necessary to address the task, 
and the provision of input sheets to collect text, data and metadata along with an 
object to be uploaded; 
an  access 
communication  facilities  (e.g.,  chats  with 
engineers), where questions may be asked or comments collected and saved.  
On the software engineers’ side, one needs tools to control, correct and integrate 

to  special  purpose  digitizing  and  modeling  software  and 
the  curator,  experts,  software 

 

Biella D., Pilz T., Sacher D., Weyers B., Luther W., Baloian N., Schreck T. ...

1287

 

Figure 2: Seal and digital 3D reconstruction by [Yaslar 13], 3D printout by [Köhler 

14] 

 [Köhler 14] produced a 3D printout of the reconstructed seal placed in the middle 
of the access hall of a VM presenting the work of Leopold Fleischhacker (LFM) and 
describes the workflow as follows: 1) provide the geometrical data, 2) preprocess data 
and execute machine setup, 3) slice the object and generate a path of the printer head 
and  4)  build  and  post-process  the  output.  On  Figure  2,  photos  and  screenshots 
illustrate the steps in the process. From left to right these are (1) scan the sculpture, 
(2) produce a Blender model followed by (3) toolpath visualization and (4) use Slic3r 
to  convert  the  digital  3D  model  into  printing  instructions,  such  as  G  code.  This 
process  cuts  the  model  into  horizontal  slices,  generates  toolpaths  to  fill  them  and 
calculates the amount of material to be extruded. The final result can be seen in the 
rightmost image.  

We conclude this section  with some brief remarks about the experiences in our 
co-curation projects: Engaged and motivated people did a great part of work; curators 
and software engineers furnished a concept, allowed access to the artwork, introduced 
the ViMCOX standard and provided tools. A clear definition of the workflow and the 
requested  contributions,  support  during  realization,  and  quality  control  are  also 
important; rights transfers and water marking techniques were also agreed. 

5 

Use Cases 

This  section  demonstrates 
the  relevance  of  co-curation  and  crowd-sourced 
information by means of two use cases. Section 5.1 examines semi-automatic shape 
restoration supported by crowd editing, and section 5.2 explores LFM embedded in a 
physical museum offering various channels for visitor interaction and feedback.  

 Semi-automatic Shape Restoration Based on Shape Completion and 

5.1 
Crowd Editing 
Reconstruction  of  high-quality  3D  shapes  is  a  requirement  for  appealing,  authentic 
visual presentation in virtual museums, but also for distributed scientific exploration. 

1288

Biella D., Pilz T., Sacher D., Weyers B., Luther W., Baloian N., Schreck T. ...

For example, archaeologists might wish to take and compare measurements of exhibit 
items. As discussed in Section 3.2, existing methods of 3D crowd acquisition, such as 
ARC3D or PHOTOSYNTH, allow 3D reconstruction  from crowd-provided images. 
However, depending on the availability of images, these reconstructions may reveal 
incomplete or inaccurate geometry. While this might be improved for intact items by 
adding more images, the problem persists when the original artifact has been chipped, 
eroded  or  partially  destroyed.  Recently,  as  part  of  the  EU  project  PRESIOUS  we 
proposed a workflow for the restoration of 3D objects in the Cultural Heritage domain 
starting from fragmented and possibly eroded items [Gregor 14, www.presious.eu]. 

This workflow comprises the steps (a) digitization of fragments or whole items, 
(b)  fragment  reassembly,  (c)  shape  completion,  and  (d)  object  finishing.  Clearly, 
crowd-sourced approaches can  help  with (a). Fragment reassembly (b) can be done 
automatically if certain assumptions hold, for instance, robust detection and matching 
of  fracture  surfaces  [Gregor  14].  For  shape  completion  (c),  in  some  cases  selfsimilarity 
 or  symmetry  properties  can  be  exploited.  Specifically,  local  3D  feature 
analysis  can  support  symmetry  detection  in  incomplete  and  possibly  noisy  shapes 
[Siripan 14] and be used to complete missing local details or larger parts of a shape 
(see  Figure  3  left  to  center).  However,  this  method  may  fail  in  a  number  of  cases 
involving  non-symmetric  shapes,  symmetry  ambiguity,  missing  parts  and  so  forth, 
which  extend  across  symmetry  planes  (see  Figure  3,  right).  Then,  crowd-based 
approaches  can  be  valuable  in  several  ways.  In  the  case  of  ambiguous  symmetries, 
one can imagine a voting scheme where users collectively identify the most plausible 
restoration result from a list of automatically suggested candidate shapes.  

 

        

    

          

 

Figure 3: Successful restoration of incomplete 3D shapes of a column base (left) and 
an  arc  (center-left),  using  fully  automatic  symmetry-based  completion.  Parametric 
shape  templates  of  relevant  objects  (center-right)  may  be  helpful  for  completing 
objects when symmetry analysis fails due to missing geometry across symmetry planes 
(tombstone, right). 

Another  option  is  interactive  editing  of  missing  parts.  An  interesting  and 
potentially  scalable  approach  includes  the  modeling  of  parametric  template  shapes 
describing a set of plausible shapes in the domain of the virtual museum (see Figure 

Biella D., Pilz T., Sacher D., Weyers B., Luther W., Baloian N., Schreck T. ...

1289

3, center-right, for an example). The system may use such template shapes in several 
ways,  including  as  validation  of  automatically  computed  restoration  results  or  as  a 
reference  for  interactive  shape  completion.  Crowd-based  approaches  could  also  be 
helpful in finishing a restored shape with respect to object surface detail. Approaches 
such  as  GeoBrush  [Takayama  14]  can  help  to  finish  the  surface  details  of  restored 
object parts by interactively transferring surface details from original to restored parts. 
In future work we wish to explore the latter ideas further. 

The Virtual Leopold Fleischhacker Museum 

5.2 
The LFM consists primarily of annotated photographs and reconstructed tombstones 
and hosts about 200 pictorial exhibits in 13 rooms; 3D assets include plants, pillars, 
glass vitrines, benches and information tableaux. We decided to develop the museum 
using  X3D  and  Java/PHP  technology  and  the  powerful  BS  contact  X3D  plugin  to 
display the virtual environment at http://www.vimedeas.com/museums/MuseumPHP/. 

Figure 4: Tombstones in the outside area (Foreground: Rosa Gompertz [Karnuth 

23]) 

Twenty-nine  tombstones  were  reconstructed  by  the  crowd  using  photographs, 
Blender  and  X3D  export  and  carefully  placed  outside  in  a  virtual  Jewish  cemetery 
(see  Figures  4  and  5).  Several  masks  were  reconstructed  together  with  one  greatly 
enlarged seal presented in the entrance hall (see Figure 2).  

Figure 5: Room layout of the kiosk version and as bird eye’s view of the LF as it has 
been deployed on the aixCAVE at RWTH Aachen. All rooms are arranged around a 
central room, which enables access to the various exhibitions (see [Sacher 15]). 

 

1290

Biella D., Pilz T., Sacher D., Weyers B., Luther W., Baloian N., Schreck T. ...

It  has  been  proven  that  the  impact  of  co-curating  was  significant  and 
indispensable. Volunteers contributed work to the extent of about three man-years in 
different categories of tasks:  
  Creating and enhancing digital 3D exhibits and context, mostly tombstones and 
medals,  setup  of  rooms  and  outdoor  areas,  physical  support  for  information, 
navigation aid and so forth; 

  Developing  and  completing  the  metadata  standard,  checking  new  sorts  of 

metadata and room and landscape design; 

  Defining  tours,  acting  as  test  persons  and  contributing  to  information  material 

and catalogues. 

Figure 6: Several stages of terrain creation with optional objects 

 

The  software  engineers  (here  a  group  of  CS  students)  furnished  a  terrain 

generator (see Figure 6). To build a landscape involves the following steps: 
  Create all resources, height and density maps. Define object parameters; 
  Launch  the  generation  process:  Input  object  data  and  metadata—creating  the 

terrain and placing the objects level by level; 

  Output the complete X3D file, completing a terrain pass and object pass. 
  Manually  modify  the  X3D  program  to  initiate  a  complete  outdoor  generation 

process; 

  Add items (exhibit) and specify position, scale and direction. 

The  generation  process  applies  multi-texturing  and  texture  blending  to  create  a 
realistic landscape consisting of several terrain layers, which may override each other. 
First,  a  basic  terrain  is  created  using  a  height  map.  Then  comes  a  surface  in  green 
tones  and  a  path  guiding  the  visitor  to  the  artwork.  Next,  a  fence,  a  skyline  with 
borders,  tree  lines  or  grass  planes,  fog  and  directional  light  can  be  added,  as  can 
objects  such  as  markers  or  seats.  Finally,  a  natural  background  and  skyline  are 
created. Once a terrain  has been generated, tombstones or other objects are aligned 
along the path or in the field. Access to a database with metadata and information on 
items  is  possible  via  a  head-up  display.  Clicking  on  an  information  button  initiates 
transformation of metadata to HTML code, and the plugin opens a window displaying 
the text. 

 
 
 

Biella D., Pilz T., Sacher D., Weyers B., Luther W., Baloian N., Schreck T. ...

1291

Evaluation  Design,  Exhibition  Realization  and  User 

6 
Questioning during the Fleischhacker Exhibition in Düsseldorf 

Evaluation  aspects  can  be  considered  from  the  vantage  points  of  curators,  software 
engineers, the general public and researchers involved in the development and use of 
virtual museums with a focus on their individual needs. To structure our approach, the 
evaluation is described in analogy to the framework presented in [Antunes 2012]. 

Prior to the start of the project, a preliminary questionnaire was developed within 
a  knowledge-based  evaluation  setting.  Partitioned  into  five  parts,  it  helped  identify 
goals for all the parties involved and gather relevant information about the collections, 
digitization, metadata techniques and interoperability standards to be used in the field 
as well as possible usage scenarios for creating VM curator tools. 

After  realization  of  a  prototypical  LFM,  a  further  knowledgeand 
 rule-based 
evaluation dealt with software stability in accordance with either the ISO/IEC 9126 or 
the ISO/IEC/IEEE 29119 norm, failure-free system operation over a specified time, 
stress  tests  for  fluent  navigation  and  display,  and  confirmation  of  complete  and 
correct realization of the curator’s content specifications. Another survey designed as 
an interview with targeted questions provided two use cases including free and guided 
navigation  through  the  exhibition  rooms  and  outdoor  area  exhibition.  It  focused  on 
design  ﬂaws,  subjective  increase  of  knowledge,  overall  acceptance  of  virtual 
museums  and  visual  ﬁdelity/quality.  A  heterogeneous  observation  group  was 
interviewed  to  gather  feedback  from  information  technology  and  virtual  reality 
specialists,  art  history  experts,  average  museum  visitors  and  computer-savvy  users 
from  the  University  of  Duisburg-Essen,  the  Steinheim  Institute  and  the  RWTH 
Aachen.  

The  usability  concept,  co-curation  contributions  by  the  crowd  and  support  by 
curators  and  software  engineers  were  examined  during  an  exhibition  of 
Fleischhacker’s estate at the Düsseldorf Memorial to the Victims of Persecution from 
November 10, 2015, to January 27, 2016. The initial room layout (see Figure 5) was 
designed  for  an  on-site  kiosk  system  with  touch-screen  input.  Moving  to  the  next 
viewpoint, visitors selected the nearest object or changed rooms in the virtual museum 
using  point-and-click  operations  or  well-known  metaphors.  Based  on  the  LFM 
metadata, Replicave2 generated a content bundle and a VRML file, which was passed 
to Inside, an extension of the ViSTA toolkit for interactive rendering in a CAVE. In 
this  more  interactive  environment,  the  visitors  virtually  walk  through  the  virtual 
museum.  Visitors  are  able  to  access  supplementary  material  or  comment/annotate 
exhibits by photographing Quick Response (QR) codes placed in direct proximity to 
each exhibit item. 

In  the  new  Julo-Levin  hall,  four  terminals  were  installed  with  four  different 
versions  of  the  LFM.  In  addition  to  the  version  with  gamepad  and  overhead 
projection, on the left side of the room, there was a kiosk with touch screen, track ball 
and reduced keyboard to support point-and-click operations and protect the browser 
and  operating  system  against  manipulation,  allowing  free  exploration  and  guided 
tours through the exposition. Additionally, two modern all-in-one screens on the other 
side of the room ran Windows 8.1 in kiosk mode configured for assigned access to 
selected apps in  full screen  mode. This  kept the system  secure and prevented users 
from  accessing  other  applications  or  components  of  the  operating  system  in  the 

1292

Biella D., Pilz T., Sacher D., Weyers B., Luther W., Baloian N., Schreck T. ...

Windows  desktop  environment.  To  navigate,  users  employed  familiar  touch  screen 
gestures  such  as  tapping,  pressing,  sliding,  swiping  and  rotating.  Seven  video  tours 
were  available,  in  addition  to  the  version  already  used  on  the  kiosk  system.    (See 
Figures 7 & 8.) 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure  7:  Interactive  version  with  gamepad  and  QR  code:  the  Madonna  of  the 
Protective  Cloak  together  with  photos  of  the  original  sculpture.  This  architectural 
sculpture  adorns  the  offices  of  the  health  insurance  company  AOK  in  Düsseldorf 
Kasernenstrasse. This larger-than-life figure is reminiscent of the Christian images of 
the Madonna of Mercy. Symbolizing the protection offered by the insurance company, 
on  one  side,  she  shelters  a  pregnant  woman  with  a  child  in  her  cloak  and,  on  the 
other, a wounded worker and an old man.  

In our approach to VMs, crowd-sourced support in building virtual exhibitions is 
closely  linked  to  the  means  to  navigate  and  access  items  and  the  metadata  they 
provide  for  visitors.  Therefore,  a  summative  evaluation  of  the  system  focused  on 
usability  issues  and  co-curating  activities  as  distinguishing  features.  For  this  final 
study  we  designed  an  initial  questionnaire  with  27  closed  questions  and  a  final 
comment  field  for  visitors  working  with  four  versions  of  the  LFM,  each  of  which 
proposed a different way to navigate through the exposition areas and various degrees 
of  interaction.  Twenty-five  visitors  aged  16  to  79  volunteered  to  participate  in  our 
study. An initial, “younger” group (aged 16 to 18, with two or four years of computer 
science instruction) was drawn from a course entitled Computer Science and Society: 
Virtualization in Everyday Life at Horkesgath High School in Krefeld. These students 
had just been introduced to their first 3D modeling approaches and X3D language in 
class; prior to that, they had used virtual environments mainly in a gaming context. 
The  second,  “older”  group  consisted  of  visitors  to  the  LFM  who  were  willing  to 
complete our questionnaire.  

Both  groups  were  introduced  to  the  exposition  and  to  the  use  of  hardware 
installations partly through written material—a flyer and two tutorial pages just after 
the  introductory  screen—and  partly  through  instruction—the  younger  group  by  the 
accompanying teacher and the main author of the paper. They were introduced to four 
available hardware installations: a kiosk with a touch screen, trackball or special keys 

Biella D., Pilz T., Sacher D., Weyers B., Luther W., Baloian N., Schreck T. ...

1293

for  navigation;  point-and-click  operations  for  selecting  and  approaching  items;  two 
modern all-in-one touch screen computers; and a wand projection with a gamepad for 
walking through the exposition area.  

Several tools were used to evaluate the questionnaire. The test persons’ data (age) 
and answers were transferred to an Excel spreadsheet and analyzed with the statistics 
software  SPSS,  displaying  various  kinds  of  diagrams  and  applying  appropriate 
hypothesis  tests,  like  the  Mann-Whitney  U-test.  As  qualitative  feedback  from  the 
usability questionnaire, 18 participants stated what they liked the most and the least 
and what they would like to change. The 17 positive responses mainly concerned the 
wall projection with the gamepad, which enabled visitors to virtually walk through the 
rooms and to approach and explore the items, creating a kind of gaming atmosphere. 

 

Figure 8: Virtual Fleischhacker exhibition with kiosk and touchscreens in 

Düsseldorf 

A  few  people  mentioned  interesting,  well-presented  content  and  the  electronic 
catalogues. Without being explicitly asked, participants consistently tried out one or 
more tours (nearly three of five), but favored free exploration especially with the wall 
projection and gamepad navigation, it looks “like a game” and eases “the access to 
further information”. Three persons disliked the use of QR codes. Comparing the two 
kinds  of  free  exploration  on  the  kiosk  and  the  touchscreen,  most  people  preferred 
working with a modern touchscreen and found the kiosk touchscreen too slow and the 
navigation too cumbersome. Some criticized interface aspects such as missing seats or 
headsets, frozen screens and the absence of real artworks.  

Then, we compared the responses of the younger group (n1=12) with those of the 

older group (n2=13). 

Questions concerning the wall projection and gamepad navigation 

I had no problems navigating using the gamepads.  
I liked the presentation via wall projection.  
I liked moving through the exhibition space using the projection. 

25 
26 
27 

1294

Biella D., Pilz T., Sacher D., Weyers B., Luther W., Baloian N., Schreck T. ...

The hypotheses for the comparison were as follows:  

Ho: The two samples come from identical populations; the results of both tests are 

indistinguishable. 

H1: The two samples come from different populations.  
We transformed the samples into a ranked list, calculated the sum of the rankings 
(T1=105, T2=220), the test variables U1=129, U2= 27, U:=min(U1,U2), and the ratio z 
= (U- μU)/σU.= (27-78)/(132) =-2.77. This value was compared to a table of critical 
values  (here  -1.96)  for  z  based  on  the  sample  size  of  each  group.  z  exceeded  the 
critical value at a significance level of 0.05, which means that there was evidence for 
rejecting the null hypothesis in favor of the alternative hypothesis.  
Questions concerning the kiosk using a five-point Likert scale (5: completely agree) 
N
o. 
14 
15 
16 
17 

Median  (Mdn),  Mean  value  (MV),  Range  (r), 
Variance (Var)  
I was able to orient myself in the museum. 
I could approach the artworks. 
I had no problems moving between the rooms. 
I  had  no  problems  reading  the  information  about 
the artworks. 
I could listen to the audio files. 
I liked the free exploration. 
I could navigate easily within the museum. 
I liked the indoor area of the museum. 
I liked the outdoor area of the museum. 

18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23  All in all, I like the virtual exposition 

2–5 
2–5 
2–5 
1–5 
2–5 
2–5 

0.89 
1.08 
0.48 
1.80 

4.32 
4.48 
4 
3.77 

2–5 
1–5 
3–5 
1–5 

Mdn 

r 

MV 

Var 

Questions concerning the wall projection 

I had no problems using the gamepads to navigate. 
I liked the wall projection presentation. 
I  liked  moving  through the  exhibition  space  using 
the projection. 

1–5 
1–5 
3–5 

25 
26 
27 

 

 

Our first questionnaire, which included with the topic “Correcting/enhancing or 

completing exhibits, metadata or the technical platform” indicated that 
 

the  visitors  had  clear  preferences  concerning  the  technical  platform  and  the 
means of navigation, exploration and interaction with the artwork; 
there  was  a  significant  difference  between  the  group  of  daily  visitors  with 
average  age  50  and  the  school  class  concerning  the  use  of  gamepads  and  QR 
codes and concerning exploration via  wall projection or touchscreen PCs; from 
this, we concluded that we need virtual museums that offer a variety of hardware 
platforms and interaction styles; 
only a few hints were offered on further artwork to be included or metadata to be 
completed and only a small minority (20%) wanted to download the catalogs.   
Another questionnaire with 18 items concerned co-curation activities for the LFM 
and  was  distributed  to  the  student  group.  We  wanted  to  know,  firstly,  whether  the 
taxonomy of proposed activities was meaningful and, secondly, which of the relevant 
activities would be chosen or discarded by a particular visitor group. Nine questions 
were devoted to the group’s participation during preparation of a virtual exposition, 
that is, the production of digitized items and contributions to the related metadata; six 
items  concerned  contributions  to  the  ongoing  exposition  and  publication  of  a  tour, 

 

5 
5 
4 
4 

4 
5 
4 
4 
5 
4 

5 
5 
5 

4 
4.36 
3.74 
3.65 
4.19 
4.17 

4.125 
4.125 
4.5 

1 
0.72 
0.75 
1.42 
1.16 
0.70 

1.85 
1.59 
0.64 

Biella D., Pilz T., Sacher D., Weyers B., Luther W., Baloian N., Schreck T. ...

1295

viewpoints or information about the artwork; and the last three questions pertained to 
users’ potential need for support from curators and software engineers.  

 

4 
8 

Five question were mostly answered Yes 
I took a photo of the Madonna of the Protective Cloak in Düsseldorf. 
I would like to propose solutions for frames, wall color and room lighting. 

Yes 
11/14 
  
9/12 
11/14 
11/14 

11/13 

No 
2/14 

3/14 

9  …. contribute metadata concerning the genesis and history of the artwork. 
13  …. to propose special views or viewpoints about the items, magnifications or 

16 

details. 
I needed support from curators and software engineers and special purpose 
hardand 
software to digitize and generate items. 
Two options were rejected by more than 77% 

5  … to gather interesting information on artwork similar to the Madonna of the 

Protective Cloak on the Web and enter data in prepared internet forms. 

10  … to propose special tours in the virtual museum. 

 
The students’ participation during preparation of a virtual exposition—production 
of digitized items, design of their environment and contributions to metadata, special 
views and areas of interest—were clearly approved. In contrast, providing new tours 
or information about the artwork was rejected by the majority. However, support from 
curators and provision of special purpose hardware and tools by software engineers 
were highly appreciated.  

7 

Outlook and Further Work 

Even if this evaluation survey delivers only preliminary results, we concluded that it 
is expedient to include concise questions concerning various subtasks in co-curation 
activities  within  a  call  to  build  a  virtual  exposition  and  that  there  is  a  sufficient 
acceptance to support curators in preparing expositions of general interest.   

It was decided by the curator of the LFM that no interaction or animation should 
be included as stylistic devices in the free walking and guided tours. Therefore, we 
will  also  present  a  digital  2D/3D  object  browser  similar  to  familiar  examples  (cf. 
http://examples.x3dom.org/v-must/ipad_metadata_expert/)  where  visitors  have  the 
opportunity  to  browse  and  search  for  2D/3D  exhibit  items  and  their  corresponding 
metadata as well as rotating, zooming and panning the 3D reconstructions or watching 
predefined  animations.  Further  work  concerns  evaluation  software  for  museum 
designer  to  determine  points  of  interest,  visualizing  user  walkthroughs  including 
interaction behavior, duration of a visit and tracks. Additional support for annotating 
objects  could  also  be  implemented  to  focus  on  crowdsource  and  co-knowledge 
creation.  

During the CRIWG 2015 meeting, we considered launching a new crowdsourcing 
VM project DiKEViMA devoted to Armenian khachkars (cross-stones). We wanted 
to identify accessible khachkars based on a classification of style and époque to create 
digital  3D  models  using  photographs  and  open-source  reconstruction  software.  We 
decided to recruit people with some experience in the area via an open call to students 
at the American University of Armenia in Yerevan and the University of Chile and to 

1296

Biella D., Pilz T., Sacher D., Weyers B., Luther W., Baloian N., Schreck T. ...

create  an  upload  site  for  X3D  models,  metadata  and  copyright  transfer;  we  also 
provided  tools  for  and  advice  on  producing  high-quality  3D  models,  their 
surroundings  and  relevant  metadata  in  standardized  formats.  To  this  end,  we  put 
together a team of eminent specialists in several countries who provide us with data, 
context information and photographs to find the most interesting specimens for virtual 
khachkar fields and the reconstruction of an important part of Armenian ecclesiastical 
heritage (http://www.vimedeas.com/wordpress/?page_id=203). 

Acknowledgements 
The  work  of  Tobias  Schreck  was  partially  supported  by  EC  FP7  STREP  Project 
PRESIOUS, grant no. 600533 (www.presious.eu). The 3D restoration results shown 
in  Figure  3  are  courtesy  of  Dr.  Ivan  Sipiran  (Catholic  University  of  Peru),  Robert 
Gregor (Graz University of Technology) and Danny Bauer (University of Konstanz). 

References 

[Adams 13] Adams, I: “Crowdsourcing vs. Co-creation: What’s the Difference?” (2013); 
http://blog.optimizationgroup.com/crowdsourcing-vs-co-creation-whats-the-difference  
[Antunes 12] Antunes, P., Herskovic, V., Ochoa, S., Pino, J. A.: “Structuring Dimensions for 
Collaborative Systems Evaluation”; ACM Computing Surveys 44(2), Article 8 (2012), 28 p. 
[Benson 13] Benson, S.: “Co-creation 101: How to Use the Crowd as an Innovation Partner to 
Add Value to your Brand”; VisionCritical. (21 Oct. 2013); visioncritical.com/cocreation-101/  
[Biella  06]  Biella,  D.:  “Replication  of  Classical  Psychological  Experiments  in  Virtual 
Environments”; PhD-Thesis, University of Duisburg-Essen, Logos, Berlin (2006) 
[Biella 10]  Biella,  D.,  Luther, W.,  Baloian,  N.:  “Virtual Museum  Exhibition  Designer  Using 
Enhanced ARCO Standard”; XXIX International Conference of the Chilean Computer Science 
Society (SCCC) 2010, Nov. 15-19, IEEE Press (2010), 226-235. 
[Biella  12]  Biella,  D.,  Luther,  W.,  Sacher,  D.:  “Schema  Migration  into  a  Web-based 
Framework for Generating Virtual Museums and Laboratories”; 18th International Conference 
on Virtual Systems and Multimedia (VSMM) 2012, IEEE Press, Milan (2012), 307-314.  
[Biella 15] Biella, D., Sacher, D., Weyers, B., Luther, W., Baloian, N., Schreck, T.: “Crowdsourcing 
 and  Knowledge  Co-creation  in  Virtual  Museums”;  Proc.  CRIWG  2015,  Yerevan, 
Armenia, Sept. 22-25, LNCS 9334 Springer (2015), 1-18. 
[Boon  11]  Boon,  Tim:  “Co-Curation  and  the  Public  History  of  Science  and  Technology”; 
Curator:  The  Museum 
(2011),  383–387,  DOI:  10.1111/j.21516952.
2011.00102.x. 
[Carletti  13]  Carletti,  L.,  McAuley,  D.,  Price,  D.,  Giannachi,  G.,  Benford,  S.:  “Digital 
Humanities and Crowdsourcing: An Exploration”; Museums and the Web 2013, The Annual 
Conference of Museums and the Web, April 17-20, 2013, Portland, OR, USA (2013); 
mw2013.museumsandtheweb.com/paper/digital-humanities-and-crowdsourcing-an-exploration-4/   
[Dierickx 05] Dierickx, B. and Tsolis, D.: “Overview of Collective Licensing Models and of 
DRM  Systems  and  Technologies  Used  for  IPR  Protection  and  Management”;  eContentplus 
(2005); www.athenaeurope.org/getFile.php?id=665  

Journal,  54,  4 

Biella D., Pilz T., Sacher D., Weyers B., Luther W., Baloian N., Schreck T. ...

1297

[Echavarria  12]  Echavarria,  K.,  R.,  Theodoridou,  M.,  Georgis  Ch.,  Arnold,  D.,  Doerr,  M., 
Stork,  A.,  Peña  Serna,  S.:  “Semantically  Rich  3D  Documentation  for  the  Preservation  of 
Tangible Heritage”; In: Arnold, D., Kaminski, J., Niccolucci, F., and Stork, A. (Editors): The 
13th International Symposium on Virtual Reality, Archaeology and Cultural Heritage VAST, 
the Eurographics Association (2012); http://dx.doi.org/10.2312/VAST/VAST12/041-048  
[Gregor 14] Gregor, R., Sipiran, I., Papaioannou, G., Schreck, T., Andreadis, A., and Mavridis, 
P.: “Towards Automated 3D Reconstruction of Cultural Heritage Objects”; Proc. Eurographics 
Workshop on Graphics and Cultural Heritage, Eurographics Association (2014), 135-144.  
[Hopmann  13]  Hopmann,  D.:”Room  Measurement  Using  Photogrammetric  Methods  and 
Mobile  Phones  for  Exhibition  Planning  and  Archiving”;  Diploma  thesis  (in  German), 
University of Duisburg-Essen (2013) 
[Howe 06] Howe, J. (2006); crowdsourcing.typepad.com/cs/2006/06/crowdsourcing_a.html   
[Karnuth  13]  Karnuth,  M.:  “Präsentation  einer  virtuellen  Ausstellung  im  Innenund 

Außenbereich  zum  Werk  von  Leopold  Fleischhacker“;  Diplomarbeit,  Universität  DuisburgEssen 
(2013) 
[Köhler  14]  Köhler,  K.-M.:  “Multi-Objective  Optimization  of  Desktop  3D-Printing  with 
Respect to the Object Representation: A Software Based Approach”; Master Thesis, University 
of Duisburg-Essen (2014) 
[Oomen  11]  Oomen,  J.,  Aroyo,  L.:  “Crowdsourcing  in  the  Cultural  Heritage  Domain: 
Opportunities  and  Challenges”; C&T  '11 Proceedings  of  the 5th  International  Conference  on 
Communities and Technologies, ACM New York, NY (2011), 138-149. 
[Ridge  13]  Ridge,  M.:  “From  Tagging  to  Theorizing:  Deepening  Engagement  with  Cultural 
Heritage through Crowdsourcing”; Curator: The Museum Journal, 56, 4 (2013), 435-450.  
[Sacher 13] Sacher, D., Biella, D., and Luther, W.: “Towards a Versatile Metadata Exchange 
Format  for  Digital  Museum  Collections”;  IEEE  Proceedings  2013  Digital  Heritage 
International Congress, 28 Oct–1 Nov 2013 Marseille, France, Vol. 2, IEEE Press (2013), 129136.
  
[Sacher 15] Sacher, D., Weyers, B., Torsten W. Kuhlen, T. W., Luther, W.: “An Integrative 
Tool  Chain  for  Collaborative  Virtual  Museums  in  Immersive  Virtual  Environments”;  Proc. 
CRIWG 2015, Yerevan, Armenia, Sept. 22-25, LNCS 9334 Springer, (2015), 86-94. 
[Siripan  14]  Sipiran,  I.,  Gregor,  R.,  and  Schreck,  T.:  “Approximate  Symmetry  Detection  in 
Partial 3D Meshes”; Computer Graphics Forum, 33, 7 (2014), 131-140. 
[Straub  14]  Straub,  J.  and  Kerlin,  S.:  “Development  of  a  Large,  Low-Cost,  Instant  3D 
Scanner”; Technologies 2, (2014), 76-95. 
[Takayama 14] Takayama, K., Schmidt, R., Singh, K., Igarashi, T., Boubekeur, T., and Sorkine, 
O.: GeoBrush: Interactive Mesh Geometry Cloning; Computer Graphics Forum, 30, 2 (2011), 
613-622. 
[Wang  14]  Wang,  G.,  Wang,  T.,  Zheng,  H.,  Zhao,  B.Y.:  “Man  vs.  Machine:  Practical 
Adversarial  Detection  of  Malicious  Crowdsourcing  Workers”;  SEC'14  Proc.  of  the  23rd 
USENIX conference on Security Symposium, (2014), 239-254; 
https://www.cs.ucsb.edu/~gangw/turfing.pdf  
[Yaslar 13] Yaslar, S.: “Low Cost 3D-Scanner: Mobile 3D - Scan with MS Kinect-Controller”; 
Diploma thesis; University of Duisburg-Essen (2013) 

