Journal of Universal Computer Science, vol. 19, no. 14 (2013), 2037-2053
submitted: 3/2/13, accepted: 29/7/13, appeared: 1/8/13 © J.UCS

Using Cloud Services to Develop Learning Scenarios 

from a Software Engineering Perspective 

(Ruhr-West University of Applied Sciences, Mülheim an der Ruhr, Germany 

marc.jansen@hs-ruhrwest.de) 

Marc Jansen 

(University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands 

(Computer Science Department, Universidad de Chile, Santiago de Chile, Chile 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 

Lars Bollen 

l.bollen@utwente.nl) 

Nelson Baloian 

nbaloian@dcc.uchile.cl) 

H. Ulrich Hoppe 

(University of Duisburg-Essen, Duisburg, Germany 

hoppe@inf.uni-due.de) 

Abstract:  The  term  “Cloud  Computing”  does  not  primarily  specify  new  types  of  core 
technologies  but  rather  addresses  features  to  do  with  integration,  inter-operability  and 
accessibility.  Although  not  new,  virtualization  and  automation  are  core  features  that 
characterize Cloud Computing. In this paper, we intend to explore the possibility of integrating 
cloud  services  with  educational  scenarios  without  re-defining  neither  the  technology  nor  the 
usage  scenarios  from  scratch.  Our  suggestion is  based on  certain  solutions  that have  already 
been implemented and tested for specific cases. 
 
Keywords: Cloud Computing, Cloud Services, Learning Scenarios  
Categories: C.2.4, K.3.1 

1 

Introduction  

Cloud  Computing  provides  a  set  of  ubiquitous  services  that  are  often  used  to 
overcome certain limitations of mobile devices, desktop computers or server systems, 
especially to improve accessibility and interoperability. The set of Cloud Computing 
services is usually subdivided into at least the three following parts [Chappell 2008]: 

1. 

IaaS  -  Infrastructure  as  a  Service:  Virtual  provision  of  computing  power 
and/or memory. A prominent example of an IaaS service is the Amazon WS 
service.  

2.  PaaS  –  Platform  as  a  Service:  Provision  of  a  runtime  environment,  like 
application  servers,  databases  etc.  In  this  area,  Google's  App  Engine  is 
probably the most prominent example. 

3.  SaaS  –  Software  as  a  Service:  Provision  of  usually  browser  based 
applications that can directly  be used. Here, Google Docs or the Customer 
Relationship Management software of salesforce.com serves as examples. 

2038

Jansen M., Bollen L., Baloian N., Hoppe H.U.: Using Cloud Services ...

One  aspect  that  is  common  to  these  three  types  or  levels  is  the  high  degree  of 
automation that is pursued by such kinds of Cloud Services. On the IaaS level, Cloud 
Computing can be understood as virtualization technology along with a high degree 
of  automation,  whereas  PaaS  provides  a  flexible  way  for  the  deployment  of 
applications and SaaS is able to provide applications directly to the end-user, again, in 
a flexible and highly automated way. 

In this paper, we discuss possible contributions of Cloud Services to new forms of 
technology-enhanced  learning  and  teaching.  The  term  Cloud  Services  itself  will  be 
explained  later  on  in  more  detail.  Starting  with  an  abstraction  of  the  common 
understanding  of  Cloud  Computing,  transferring  the  abstracted  features  to  other 
prominent internet services like, e.g., Twitter, Facebook and GoogleMaps (which we 
see as specific instances of Cloud Services in the context of this paper), we argue that 
in the context of learning scenarios a wider definition of Cloud Services is needed to 
encompass possibly relevant new developments. Furthermore, this paper presents an 
architecture  that  allows  the  flexible  usage  of  services  that  belong  to  the  extended 
definition of Cloud Computing. We describe four examples of learning scenarios that 
build  upon  the  presented  architecture  to  demonstrate  how  these  services  facilitate 
innovative aspects of technology-enhanced learning scenarios. Finally, an outlook for 
future development of this understanding of Cloud Services is presented.  

2  An  Alternative  Perspective  on  Cloud  Services  for  Learning 

Scenarios 

In  abstraction,  Cloud  Computing  increases  the  flexibility  of  modern  applications 
while at the same time improving security aspects such as availability, data storage or 
communication. Furthermore, one major aspect in Cloud Computing scenarios is the 
accessibility of the provided services through a standardization of interfaces. 

With  respect  to  learning  scenarios,  a  different  perspective  to  these  abstracted 
features  of  Cloud  Computing  services  (referred  to  in  this  paper  as  Cloud  Services) 
offers  a  new  understanding  of  prominent  services  like  Twitter  or  Facebook.  These 
Cloud Services can  then be  used as entry points  for value-adding  functions both in 
formal  and  informal  learning  settings,  remote  and  co-located  situations  and  in 
synchronous or asynchronous scenarios. On the one hand using such services allows 
getting  into  contact  with  students  on  internet  platforms  where  they  spend  a  large 
amount of their time [Jansen et al. 2012], and on the other hand, to use off-the-shelf 
software  [Pettersson  &  Vogel  2012],  which  saves  implementation  efforts  and 
development  time,  but  allows  for  using  contributions  from  the  students  via  these 
different Cloud Services. 

3  Different Categories for Cloud Services for Learning Scenarios 

This section describes four major categories that Cloud Services can be subdivided in. 
It is important to mention that the following categories are not disjoint, so that a given 
Cloud Service can belong to more than one category. Nevertheless, having a common 
understanding  of  these  four  categories  might  help  to  foster  the  communication  and 

Jansen M., Bollen L., Baloian N., Hoppe H.U.: Using Cloud Services ...

2039

discussion of future development of both, Cloud Service themselves and applications 
using provided Cloud Services. 

Services 

can 

facilitate 

3.1  Category 1: Cloud-based Communication Services 
Cloud-based  Communication 
computer-mediated 
communication  between  learners  in  the  context  of  collaborative  learning  scenarios. 
This  can  either  be  in  co-located  or  remote  modes,  as  well  as  in  synchronous  and 
asynchronous 
learning  scenarios.  Prominent  examples  of  such  Cloud-based 
Communication Services are the Facebook Chat, the use of Twitter, for sending small 
messages  to  groups,  and  discussion/support  networks  like  stackoverflow.com,  for 
discussing special topics like technology related inquiries. 

The implemented communication can be of various nature: with respect to usual 
chat  tools,  e.g.,  the  Facebook  Chat,  the  communication  will  be  among  a  group  of 
people  that  know  each  other  (at  least  to  some  extent)  who  (virtually)  meet  on  a 
frequent basis on the given platform. This kind of communication is not necessarily 
limited  to  a  certain  topic.  On  the  other  hand,  in  social  networks  like  Twitter,  the 
messages are shared within a group of people interested in messages that one person 
is posting. These groups are usually referred to as “followers”. The communication 
here does not necessarily happen in the way that everyone in the group can read what 
everyone  else  writes,  but  everyone  in  the  group  (that  is  every  “follower”)  can  read 
what the person they are following has written, but not what other “followers” reply. 
In  the  third  example  of  discussion/support  networks  (stackoverflow.com),  the 
communication  is  completely  open.  Everyone  can  answer  a  question  and  can  also 
reply  to  answers  from  other  participants.  Here,  usually,  the  participants  in  the 
discussion do not know each other and the group is formed informally by people just 
taking part in the discussion. This kind of communication could be characterized as 
topic-centred (rather than person-centred).  

Cloud  based  Communication  Services  are  an  interesting  resource  to  be  used  in 
learning  scenarios.  One  hand  they  can  be  used  for  fostering  the  communication 
among  a  group  of  learners  and  on  the  other  hand  for  a  later-on  analysis  of  the 
communication  in  order  to  reflect  about  the  learning  process.  They  are  readily 
available and do not require specific extra implementation or installation efforts. 

3.2  Category 2: Cloud-based Repository Services 
This  category  of  Cloud  Computing  based  services  allows  its  users  to  build  up 
repositories by storing and retrieving objects in the Cloud. Typical examples of such 
services  are  Dropbox  or  Amazon  Simple  Storage  Service  (S3).  E.g.,  Dropbox 
provides facilities to store any file in an external storage hosted in the Cloud. Here, 
Dropbox  provides  a  rich  integration  in  the  common  operating  systems  (Windows, 
Linux, MacOS X, etc.) so that storing a file in the Cloud is as easy as storing the file 
on a local harddisk.  

Similarly, Amazon S3 also provides the possibility to store files in the Cloud. In 
contrast to Dropbox, the major focus of Amazon S3 is not so much on the consumer 
market,  but  the  service  is  more  targeted  towards  users  of  other  Cloud  Computing 
Services  offered  by  Amazon,  e.g.,  users  of  Amazons  IaaS  infrastructure  can  store 

2040

Jansen M., Bollen L., Baloian N., Hoppe H.U.: Using Cloud Services ...

harddisks of  virtualized servers easily in an  S3 data structure.  A rich  user interface 
integration, as known from Dropbox, is not yet available for Amazon S3. 

Other  examples  of  Cloud  Computing  based  Storage  Services  would  be 
specialized storage solutions, e.g. for videos (like Vimeo or Youtube) or photos (like 
Flickr or Instagram). Here, the major difference between these topic related storage 
solutions  and  the  more  general  solutions  mentioned  before  is  on  the  one  hand,  the 
specialization, for a certain type of files (like videos or photos). On the other hand, 
these  highly  specialized  storage  solutions  are  usually  enhanced  with  asynchronous 
communication  mechanisms  such  as  commenting  or  discussion  functions,  e.g.,  to 
discuss an uploaded video or photos. As mentioned before, this is an example that the 
four  different  categories  may  overlap  (here  with  the  first  category,  providing  also 
communication channels).  

Nevertheless,  the  major  added  value  of  Cloud-based  Repository  Services  is  on 
sharing content among a potentially larger number of users. This makes these kind of 
services  especially  interesting  for  learning  scenarios,  e.g.,  for  building  Learning 
Object  Repositories  (LOR)  [Neven,  Duval  2002],  so  repository  in  which  learning 
outcomes  can  be  stored  in  order  for  being  re-used  either  as  input  for  new  learning 
scenarios or as a bases for discussion and analysis of certain learning activities. 

3.3  Category 3: Cloud-based Production Services 
The  third  category  of  Cloud  based  Services,  the  Cloud  based  Production  Services, 
focus  on  the  generation  of  new  content  and/or  information  enrichment.  Here,  we 
would particularly distinguish “rich” production  from the simple provision of small 
textual  input  as  it  is  already  provided  in  communication  tools.  The  web-based 
application MindMeister for producing mind maps is an example for such a service.  
Often,  production  services  draw  on  services  of  the  first  two  categories  in  order  to 
gather  and  re-arrange  information  from  different  sources  together  into  a  new 
application. As a user interface, Cloud-based Production Services often appear as socalled 
mashups. A mashup is an application that retrieves data from different sources 
and combines them into a new application, usually focused on a new user group. A 
nice example of such a mashup can be found in [Rizzardini, Linares et al. 2012]. 

The major clue with this kind of Cloud-based Services for learning scenarios is 
on the one hand the re-use of already implemented applications and the data that this 
applications provide, and on the other hand, the high degree of integration of different 
applications,  that  this  approach  allows.  The  combination  of  these,  allows  for  the 
production  of  new  data,  together  with  a  much  differentiated  view  on  this  data 
provided by the different applications that are used in order to generate the new data. 
Here, of course, the combination of the formerly mentioned two categories supports 
the process of production of rich data within activities of certain learning scenarios. 

3.4  Category 4: Cloud-based Processing Services 
The last category of  Cloud based Services, the category of Cloud based Processing 
Services, allows to investigate/process data, especially when this data comes in huge 
datasets. A typical example of this kind of service would be the Amazon Elastic Map 
and  Reduce  service.  This  service  provide  a  core  implementation  of  the  Map-andReduce,
  classical  divide  and  conquer  algorithm  introduced  by  Google  in  [Dean, 

Jansen M., Bollen L., Baloian N., Hoppe H.U.: Using Cloud Services ...

2041

Ghemawat  2004],  that  allows  to  easily  analyze  huge  datasets  with  a  minimal 
implementation effort. 

Cloud-based Processing Services allow for the analysis of the learning activities 
either  in  real-time  in  order  to  actively  support  the  learner  during  a  given  learning 
activity,  or  afterwards  in  order  to  understand  benefits  and  problems  the  learner 
gained/had  performing  the  learning  activity  in  the  sense  of  separate  re-usable  and 
configurable analytics services. Therefore, Cloud based Processing Services have the 
potential  to  increase  the  efficiency  of  learning  activities/scenarios  by  analyzing  the 
learning outcomes and the steps that a certain group of learners takes.  

Of  course,  the  data  provided  by  the  analysis  is  often  provided  by  Cloud-based 
Production  Services,  Cloud-based  Communication  Services  and/or  Cloud-based 
Repository Services. Therefore, the last category often exploits data provided by the 
other three categories. 

4  A  Software  Engineering  Perspective  on  Cloud  Services  for 

Learning Applications 

interpreted  somewhat  differently  with  respect 

The reuse of software components is one of the building blocks of modern Software 
Engineering approaches. In [Pettersson & Vogel 2012] the authors state that the term 
“re-use”  can  be 
to  Software 
Engineering  approaches  for  the  field  of  Technology-Enhanced-Learning  (TEL).  On 
the one hand, there is the re-use of content, which seems to be fairly well accepted. 
On the other hand, there is the re-use of both single software components as well as 
the  re-use  of  established  and  approved  architectures.  In  contrast  to  the  re-use  of 
content, these two more technical aspects of re-use are not yet well accepted or used. 
Here,  the  usage  of  cloud  services  might  help  to  either  increase  the  re-use  of  single 
software components, e.g., provided as Web Services, and the re-use of established 
and approved architectures. 

Web  Services,  as  one  of  the  building  blocks  for  modern  Cloud  Computing 
environments, implement the idea of providing re-usable software components. One 
view to Web Services is that the major idea of Web Services is to provide re-usable 
software components that are made available through a set of standardized protocols. 
These  protocols  support  consumers  of  these  Web  Services  through  the  complete 
development  cycle  from  finding  a  particular  service  (e.g.,  in  a  UDDI  repository), 
accessing  the  description  of  the  service  interface  (e.g.,  described  in  WSDL)  to 
consuming the service (e.g., by using protocols like SOAP or REST). Therefore, the 
provisioning of Web Services in itself already provides a big opportunity for re-using 
single software components and by using the mentioned standardized protocols, the 
re-use of these kinds of software components is even possible beyond the borders of a 
single organization.  

This is particularly interesting for learning scenarios, since in this area, there are 
not  many  commercially  oriented  organizations  or  research  groups.  Instead,  the 
different players are willing to share their content as well as their developed services 
among  each  other  in  order  to  foster  collaboration  among  different  learning 
communities.  Of  course,  when  it  comes  to  content  re-use,  aside  from  the 
technological  problems  that  are  fairly  easy  to  solve  by  using  Web  Services,  other 

2042

Jansen M., Bollen L., Baloian N., Hoppe H.U.: Using Cloud Services ...

problems  such  as  the  ownership  of  the  resulting  learning  outcomes  and  questions 
about the right to re-use these learning materials arise, as, e.g., discussed in [Giemza, 
Verheyen et al. 2012].  

From  an  architectural  point  of  view,  due  to  their  possibility  of  re-use  Web 
Services  allow  a  completely  new  approach  to  the  architectural  development  of  the 
resulting  software,  and  of  course,  also  for  the  resulting  learning  applications.  Here, 
the development of new software can be performed based on an architecture that is 
usually referred to as a Service-Oriented-Architecture (SOA). The building blocks of 
a  new  software  developed  based  on  this  architecture  are  services  (in  our  context 
usually Web Services). The major idea of a SOA is to build new software based on a 
number of already existing services. The general task that a piece of software should 
fulfil  is  usually  split  up  into  different  subtasks  that  are  performed  by  a  number  of 
different,  and  usually  already  existing,  services.  Later  on,  after  completing  all  the 
subtasks, the results of these subtasks are aggregated into the solution of the general 
task.  The  combination  of  the  different  services  that  fulfil  the  subtasks  and  the 
combination  of  the  results  if  often  referred  to  as  “orchestration”  and  the  produced 
code is often referred to as “glue code”. Using a SOA based architecture nowadays 
changes  completely  the  usual  software  development  process  from  having  to  write  
every piece of code (even with the help of already developed API’s) that is necessary 
in  order  to  fulfil  the  task  at  hand,  to  finding  services  that  support  the  developer  in 
solving 
and 
providing/implementing  the  glue  code  that  allows  to  solve  the  current  task.  In  this 
sense, the Cloud Computing paradigm itself provides already a new approach for the 
architecture of learning scenarios.  

orchestration 

services 

task, 

the 

of 

these 

the 

special 

Cloud services may also lead to an enrichment on the content level: The matching 
of user (learner) needs to available materials may draw on existing learner profiles, 
e.g.  in  social  or  professional  networks,  in  addition  to  content  related  resources, 
possibly  using  semantic  web  technologies.  The  added  value  over  conventional 
learning  metadata  approaches  would  be  the  openness  and  free  connectivity  of  the 
environment. 

From a technological point of view, Cloud Computing could be seen as the next 
consequent development step from a SOA to an architecture that does not only allow 
the  re-use  of  content  and  services  (in  the  terms  of  single  steps  in  a  process),  but 
additionally  the  re-use  of  computational  resources.  E.g.  in  an  SaaS  scenario  a 
complete software stack would be re-used, which is pretty close to the idea of a SOA 
where basically single services are the major goal of re-use. On the next level, in a 
PaaS scenario, not single services are the target for re-use, but the infrastructure for 
running these services can be shared by different consumers. Last but not least, IaaS 
scenarios allow for re-using infrastructure on the lowest technical level, e.g., the re-
use/sharing  of  computational  resources  (like  virtual  servers),  network  resources 
and/or storage resources. Hence, Cloud Computing allows to overcome the limitations 
that  usually  exist  within  SOA’s,  e.g.,  that  the  re-use  is  still  limited  to  the  content 
and/or  the  services  in  terms  of  process  steps,  and  allows  to  provide  re-use  for  the 
complete stack from single software services to the technical layer of the network and 
the storage. 

 

Jansen M., Bollen L., Baloian N., Hoppe H.U.: Using Cloud Services ...

2043

 

Figure 1: Different degree of re-use with different software engineering approaches 

Figure  1  shows  the  idea  of  understanding  Cloud  Computing  as  the  consequent 
next step of software engineering in order to extend the re-usability to the level of not 
only re-using software components but also infrastructure components. 

5  Example Learning Scenarios using Cloud Services 
Keeping  in  mind  the  previously  mentioned  benefits  of  Cloud  Computing,  services 
such  as  Twitter,  Facebook  and  GoogleMaps  provide  similar  benefits  to  computersupported 
 learning  environments,  e.g.,  by  increasing  flexibility,  availability  and  the 
accessibility  of  services  and  content  through  standardized  methods.  Therefore, 
services as those described above can also be understood as cloud services and can 
then be used in learning scenarios in order to exploit the described benefits of Cloud 
Computing based services, integrating cloud services as input channels. 
In  this  section,  we  will  describe  two  different  approaches  to  implement  computersupported 
 learning  environments  that  make  use  of  and  integrate  Cloud  Computing 
services. Our proposal does not primarily aim at defining new cloud environments for 
education, but to connect specific educational environments  around virtual or face-toface 
classroom scenarios with existing Cloud Services. One approach, called "Mobile 
Contributions"  (MoCo)  stresses  the  use  of  various  cloud  services  as  data  input 
mechanism  for  the  system  in  order  to  increment  its  accessibility.  The  second  one 
called  “Antenna  Planning  Learning”  (SiPlAnt  for  its  name  in  Spanish)  stresses  the 
approach of combining various existing cloud services to develop a new system. 
At  the  end  of  each  example,  we  will  classify  and  discuss  the  examples  along  the 
categories from section 3. 

2044

Jansen M., Bollen L., Baloian N., Hoppe H.U.: Using Cloud Services ...

Integration of Mobile Contributions 

5.1 
The  basic  idea  behind  "MoCo"  ("Mobile  Contributions")  is  to  create  a  software 
architecture and to define application scenarios to allow learners to create and send 
short  contributions  to  actively  participate  in  educational  activities.  To  this  end,  we 
envisage  a  system  that  integrates  various  "input  channels"  with  a  flexible  storage 
engine and visualization frontend. 

A technical infrastructure to support this is outlined in Figure 2. The major task 
performed by this infrastructure is to provide a certain abstraction for the messages 
received through the different input channels, store these messages and later allow a 
flexible message visualization to be used in learning units. 

 

Figure 2: Architecture to support multichannel input 

This  architecture  is  a  generalization  of  an  approach  that  has  been  implemented 
and tested with certain specific cases [Bollen, Jansen et al. 2012]. In the sequel, we 
describe  some  example  scenarios  illustrating  our  understanding  of  the  benefits  that 
Cloud Services  might bring to learning scenarios. Here,  we see advantages in both, 
formal and informal learning settings. A differentiation can additionally be made with 
regard to synchronicity – contents can be generated and directly used in class, e.g., to 
support  face-to-face  scenarios,  to  replace  moderation  cards  and  flipcharts  in 
individual  and  group  work.  Contents  can  also  be  generated  in  class  and  used  in  a 
future session. 

One particular strength of integrating this kind of cloud services is that in addition 
to  supporting  and  enabling  the  scenarios  described  here,  it  also  supports  seamless 
transitions  between  those  scenarios.  For  example,  it  is  intended  to  motivate  the 
learners in informal learning scenarios, to contribute and make use of this content in a 
face-to-face classroom situation in a fully integrated way. The following subsections 

Jansen M., Bollen L., Baloian N., Hoppe H.U.: Using Cloud Services ...

2045

describe four scenarios which can be carried out with the help of the mentioned Cloud 
Services  in  more  detail.  Our  basic  approach  is  to  use  existing  services  to  create, 
collect  and  visualize  students'  contribution  in  various  educational  settings  and 
scenarios.  These  scenarios  build  upon  established  learning  and  teaching  scenarios; 
their  realization  with  the  help  of  the  before-mentioned  Cloud  Services  and  the 
proposed architecture add flexibility in time, space, synchronicity and re-usability of 
technology and data. 

5.1.1  One-Minute Papers 
One-minute-papers are a flexible and efficient way of collecting feedback from small 
and large groups of learners in seminars or lectures (also refer to, e.g., [Angelo, Cross 
1993; Chizmar, Ostrosky 1998; Stead 2005] for details and empirical findings on the 
method). Students are handed a piece of paper with questions they have to answer in 
(typically) one minute.  

Example questions may focus on the contents of the seminar lesson, e.g., "What 
did I like?",  "What was new to me?", "What do I consider important?", "What have I 
learned?"  Furthermore,  they  may  also  ask  for  topics  and  relationships  that  are  still 
unclear  to  the  learner.  In  doing  this,  a  personal  dialogue  is  established  between 
student  and  teacher,  which  can  be  especially  difficult  to  establish  in  larger  groups. 
According to Stead [Stead 2005], this may improve student motivation. 

With the help of our approach and architecture, these scenarios can be brought to 
the  participants  by  using  any  kind  of  computational  device  (e.g.  notebook, 
smartphone,  tablet)  and  the  students’  favourite  input  channels.  Providing  an 
environment  that  enables  a  computer-supported  variant  of  the  One-Minute  Paper 
method brings relief to teaching staff by saving time and material compared to the pen 
and paper version. Students' comments can be easily organized, compared, visualized 
and  stored.  Especially  for  larger  amounts  of  students,  this  is  expected  to  ease  the 
handling  of  learners'  feedback.  First  experiences  on  the  use  of  a  web-based  input 
service (available to smartphones, tablets and notebooks) to realize the One-Minute 
paper method have been recently described by Bollen et al. [Bollen et al. 2012]. 

Supporting Self-Learning Phases 

5.1.2 
Another application scenario is the support of self-learning phases between classroom 
sessions.  It  is  important  for  students  to  be  able  to  transfer  the  newly  acquired 
knowledge to situations in their everyday life. The discovery of one’s own examples, 
together with sensitivity for similarities and applicability, does also ideally lead to a 
deepening  of  knowledge  and  makes  learning  contents  more  easily  retrievable  when 
needed. 

Tasks  like  this  can  appear  in  almost  every  domain  at  every  stage  of  a  lecture, 
seminar  or  student  project.  Results  can  be  collected  and  visualized  for  an  in-class 
usage. Besides this, as mentioned before, students are regularly prompted to report on 
situations  and  examples  that  illustrate  the  learning  content.  Therefore,  the  learner 
would be able to contribute and share examples for future sessions. 

As  an  example,  which  originates  from  first  experiences  and  trials,  the  learners' 
task  was  to  relate  a  new  topic  in  a  seminar  with  everyday  life's  experiences.  The 
teacher prepared sentence opener questions to guide the learners, who had one week 

2046

Jansen M., Bollen L., Baloian N., Hoppe H.U.: Using Cloud Services ...

time  to  collect  and  communicate  their  findings  -  using  tablets,  notebooks  or 
smartphones and wherever and whenever appropriate. 

the  proposed  architecture  allows  for  a  flexible  generation  and 
accumulation of students' contribution over time, together with a visualization support 
that helps teachers and students likewise organize and share results. 

Again, 

5.1.3  Group Discussion Support 
As  a  third  application  scenario,  we  present  a  situation  that  utilizes  the  described 
architecture  in  a  synchronous,  co-located  manner.  In  a  classroom  situation,  the 
proposed system can be used to visualize textual contributions that have been created 
by the learners and sent from various sources. These contributions are received and 
processed immediately and can be presented with the help of a large, shared display, 
e.g. by using a video projection. Similar approaches have been described, e.g., by Liu 
and Kao [Liu & Kao 2005] and by Bollen et al. [Bollen et al. 2006]. 

By  these  means,  classroom  discussions  can  be  supported  in  a  way  that  can  be 

beneficial in a number of ways: 

 
 

 

 

 

contributions  can  be  formulated  and  submitted  without  interference  and 
influence from peers 
contributions can be submitted anonymously,  which can raise participation 
in controversial topics or for more introverted persons 
the  course  and  structure  of  a  discussion  can  be  made  explicit  in  a  shared 
visualization 
discussion results can be stored for later (re-)use, review and comparison 
 

Scenarios  like  those  described  above  benefit  from  the  integration  of  Cloud 
Services  by  increasing  interoperability  of  peripheral  devices.  Heterogeneous  Cloud 
Services like Twitter and Facebook allow participation independent of both location 
and time. 

introduced 

the  categories 

When  applying 

in  section  3  -  Cloud-based 
Communication  Services,  Repository  Services,  Production  and  Processing  Services, 
the above mentioned example "Mobile Contributions" falls into the categories Cloudbased 
Communication Services and Cloud-based Production Services. As it supports 
the  creation  and  submission  of  students'  contributions  via  channels  like  Twitter, 
Facebook or the web, it obviously acts as a Communication Service. By integrating 
various  existing,  web-based  communication  services  to  a  new,  unique  service  with 
additional  functionality,  it  demonstrates  the  opportunities  of  creating  "added  value" 
by integrating cloud-based services. 

Apart from that, the MoCo's visualization component to show, filter and sort the 
students' contributions can be categorized as a Production Service. Here, the teacher 
creates a new artefact in his educational context, using the students' contributions as 
building blocks for a larger product.  

Supporting Learning of Signal Propagation Patterns 

5.2 
Secondly,  we  present  another  educational  scenario  which  utilizes  cloud  computing 
services  in  a  different  way.  Here,  the  aim  was  to  use  the  principles  of  SOA  for 

Jansen M., Bollen L., Baloian N., Hoppe H.U.: Using Cloud Services ...

2047

developing systems in the sense that we do not want to re-implement functionalities 
which are publicly available but to develop the “glue” code for combining them and 
implement the missing functionality which is not available in such a way previously.  
The system was developed in order to support students learning how theoretical 
models about wireless signal propagation can be applied to evaluate the effectiveness 
and efficiency of a certain arrangement of antennas [Baloian, Frez et al. 2012]. The 
learning  activity  encompasses  two  phases:  the  first  one  is  the  theory  session  where 
students learn in a classroom setting the various existing  models  for simulating the 
signal  propagation.  In  the  second  phase,  a  practical  workshop  is  performed,  which 
starts by defining working groups consisting of four students each. Two of them take 
the role planners and the other two the role of measurers. The tasks to be performed 
are also divided in two stages: the first one is the input of data stage and the second 
one the evaluation stage. 

During the input of data stage planners will make a signal coverage analysis for 
a set of existing real antennas using a signal coverage simulation tool (see Figure 3) 
and  a  collaboration  tool  (see  Figure  5).  Both  tools  have  two  different  interfaces 
implemented, one designed to be used on a desktop PC and the other to be used on 
mobile  devices  (see  Figure  4).  Students  get  the  necessary  information  to  feed  the 
signal  coverage  analysis  tool  which  actually  performs  the  simulation  after  students 
choose  the  propagation  model  they  consider  is  the  most  adequate  given  the 
cartographic information provided by Google Earth. Once the simulation is performed 
and simulated data about the signal strength for the whole area is obtained students 
receive a set of coordinates of various geographical points, which they have to input 
into the collaboration tool along with the data about the simulated signal strength for 
each of these points. During the evaluation stage, planners and measurers work using 
a collaboration platform in order to find  which is the  model that better predicts the 
real  measured values.-  Since  no single  model,  which predicts the real  value  for the 
whole area. The actual learning occurs when students have to justify the reason for 
this, by checking the different geographic and building scenarios in site.  

The  software  consists  of  two  applications,  one  for  each  role.  These  are  the 
Coverage Analysis tool for planners and the Collaboration tool which is used in both 
steps  by  both  roles.  The  Coverage  Analysis  tool  has  two  interfaces,  for  desktop 
computers  and  for  mobile  devices.  The  desktop  interface  supports  the  planning 
activity  in  the  classroom  which  includes  performing  simulations  and  storing  the 
generated data. The mobile interface is designed to provide the simulation data while 
working on the field.  The Desktop interface has following main features:  
  Add  Transmitter:  To  locate  a  virtual  antenna  over  a  3D  map  provided  by 
Google  earth  (see  Figure  3).  Technical  specifications  of  the  transmitter  can  be 
filled in a pop-up form.  

  Evaluate the Spatial coverage: This function performs the actual simulation by 

computing the signal strength in the whole area  
The  Mobile  interface  allows  students  to  retrieve  the  simulated  signal  strength 
values while students are working on the field. The system shows the simulated signal 
strength  emitted  from  the  selected  antenna  at  the  device’s  position  according  to  all 
available models. Figure 4 illustrates the system’s interface for the mobile devices. 

 
 

Jansen M., Bollen L., Baloian N., Hoppe H.U.: Using Cloud Services ...

2048

 

Figure 3: Coverage analysis tool with the 2d (up) and 3d (bottom) views 

(running in desktop browser) 

 

The Collaboration tool has also two interfaces, for desktop which is used during 
the planning phase, and for mobile devices, which is used on the field while students 
are measuring the signal strengths. The following are the main features:  
  Report  a  Simulation  (desktop  version  only):  Students  publish  the  simulated 

signal strength for a certain location.  

  Vote:  During  the  evaluation  step  students  have  to  choose  the  most  adequate 
model  to  predict  each  measured  value  of  the  signal’s  strength.  While  planners 
have  better  information  about  the  simulation  results  and  the  geographical 
characteristics of the area between the antenna and the device position, measurers 
have  on-site  information  about  the  local  conditions  for  a  certain  point.  Both 
actors can use the voting system to express their preference for one model or the 
other according to their information. 

  Report  a  Measurement  (mobile  version  only,  cf.  Fig.  5):  This  functionality 
allows  measurers  on  the  field  to  publish  measured  values  they  measure.  The 

Jansen M., Bollen L., Baloian N., Hoppe H.U.: Using Cloud Services ...

2049

system automatically adds the location information using the GPS feature of the 
mobile device and shows it on a map. 

Figure 4: The picture on the left shows the upper half of the mobile device’s interface. 
The map on the top shows the student’s current position according to the device’s 
GPS. The map on the bottom shows the antenna’s location. On right, the bottom half 
of the interface shows the signal strength values according to each available model. 

 

In this software Google Earth is used by the Coverage Analysis Tool to let the 
student situate an antenna on the map. Google Earth instead of Google Maps should 
be used because the elevations in the terrain are an important parameter for simulating 
the propagation of the signal. In the field, the Collaboration Tool uses Google Maps 
in  order  to  locate  the  place  where  the  real  and  simulated  values  will  be  compared. 
Here, the elevation is not of that importance and Google Maps is better for being used 
by  mobile  devices  because  it  requires  less  resources.  Twitter  is  used  in  the 
collaboration tool for implementing the discussion and voting functionality. The new 
functionalities implemented by the Coverage Analysis Tool are the simulation process 
and  the  visualization  of  its  results,  as  well  as  storing  the  simulation  results  in  a 
repository.  The  Collaboration  Tool  implements  the  retrieving  of  this  data  as  new 
functionalities.  

Concerning  the  classification  along  the  categories  from  section  3,  the  Signal 
Propagation  Pattern  example  naturally  fits  mainly  into  Category  1:  Cloud-based 
Communication Services  (for the implementation of the discussion among students) 
and 4 (for the simulation of the signal propagation) 

 
 
 
 

Jansen M., Bollen L., Baloian N., Hoppe H.U.: Using Cloud Services ...

2050

 

Figure 5: Desktop web browser interface used for entering simulated or measured 
signal strength values for various locations. (The user clicks on the map and enters 
the information. On the left column, detailed information is shown.) 

6 

Interoperability and Scalability of Scenarios 

 

Important features of computer-supported learning environments are interoperability 
and scalability towards educational scenarios. Is a learning environment (or a set of a 
interoperating  environments)  scalable  a)  against  an  advancing  number  of  different 
scenarios  and  b)  against  a  varying  number  of  involved  students?  Is  a  learning 
environment  (or  a  set  of  learning  environments)  providing  interoperability  between 
different education scenarios, i.e. does it support smooth transitions between varying 
scenarios? 

Most  notably,  computer-supported  learning  scenarios  can  be  categorized  along 

the dimensions of 

time: Is the user interaction in this scenario synchronous or asynchronous? 
location: Are participating learners are co-located or in remote places? 
group scale: How many learners are interacting in the given scenario? 

 
 
 
To  give  two  examples,  in  this  scheme,  a  classroom  discussion  would  be 
considered  a  synchronous,  co-located  scenario  in  a  large  group.  A  collaborative 
modelling  activity  between  two  learners  using  a  shared  workspace  environment 

Jansen M., Bollen L., Baloian N., Hoppe H.U.: Using Cloud Services ...

2051

would  be  a  remote,  synchronous  scenario  in  a  dyad.  Figure  6  illustrates  the 
dimensions described above: 

Figure 6: Dimensions of educational scenarios 

 

Along these dimensions, we can further explain the aspects of interoperability and 
scalability  of  computer-supported  learning  environments.  We  can  regard  an 
environment being scalable, if it allows the realization of scenarios along instances of 
the  dimensions  mentioned  above.  We  consider  an  environment  being  interoperable 
between  scenarios,  if  it  allows  smooth  transitions  between  instances  of  various 
scenarios. 

As an example, if an environment allows the collection of learner's contributions 
individually over a period of time, and is able to present these contributions using a 
shared display in a classroom context, this environment is capable to scale over time 
and  group  scales,  and  we  may  consider  it  as  being  interoperable,  if  the  transition 
between  those  scenarios  requires  little  or  no  effort  (concerning  the  use  of  devices, 
different software or configurations). 

Here, we claim that the use of Cloud services (especially in a way presented in 
the architectures above), is a means to gain high scalability and interoperability, not 
only  between  hardware  devices,  operating  system  and  software  applications,  but  in 
particular between educational scenarios. From the point of view of cloud services in 
educational  scenarios,  which  we  are  presenting  in  this  article,  cloud  services  are 
regarded as being advantageous in the context of this section, as they denote a very 
high accessibility in terms of time, devices, and platforms. 

7  Outlook and Future Work 

The  presented  approach  and  examples  for  the  integration  of  Cloud  Services  into 
educational  scenarios  will  in  the  future  be  used  for  the  implementation  of  more 

2052

Jansen M., Bollen L., Baloian N., Hoppe H.U.: Using Cloud Services ...

flexible learning scenarios. In this scenarios students can participate independent from 
time  and  location  and  by  using  their  favourite  communication  channel.  Informal 
learning scenarios can particularly benefit from this kind of participation, as it allows 
for  an  easier  contextualization  of  the  learner,  which  is  still  a  hot  topic,  in  mobile 
learning scenarios for example. 

The examples that we have gathered and analyzed make use of Cloud Service for 
communication and basic information input (such as geographical information). We 
would not call any web application integrating such basic services a Cloud Service in 
itself  (this  would  depend  on  the  realization  of  general  criteria  such  as  scalability, 
virtualization etc., as explained above).  

From  a  pedagogical  point  of  view,  Cloud  Services  can  be  important  building 
blocks  in  Personalized  Learning  Environments  (PLEs)  that  support  self-regulated 
learning  [Kroop  et  al.  2012].  In  this  paper,  we  have  characterized  and  exemplified 
potential  functions  of  Cloud  Services  for  learning  purposes,  but  more  research  is 
needed to explore fruitful combinations and “learning flows” based on these elements.  
Using  basic  Cloud  Services  is  still  characteristic  for  many  instances  of  educational 
usage.  For  the  future,  we  see  a  specific  interest  in  services  for  rich  production  and 
processing, the latter especially for learning analytics. This could provide a suitable 
and easily accessible way of value enrichment for many web-based learning platforms 
or environments. 

Furthermore,  we  hope  that  our  categorization  can  be  used  to  guide  empirical 
investigations  in  areas  such  as  ease  of  use  and  usefulness  of  mobile  devices  in 
educational  contexts,  of  relations  between  user  traits  and  technology  usage,  or  in 
uncovering  usage patterns  in  this  innovative  field of computer-supported education. 
Also, the use of such services increases the possibilities for integrating analysis and 
context-awareness mechanisms, e.g., by using social network analysis or educational 
data mining techniques. 

References 

[Angelo,  Cross  1993]  Angelo,  T.  A.,  Cross,  P.  K.:  "Classroom  Assessment  Techniques:  A 
Handbook for College Teachers"; Jossey-Bass, San Francisco (1993) 
[Baloian,  Frez  et  al.  2012]  Baloian,  N.,  Frez,  J.,  Zurita,  G.,  Milrad,  M.:  "Supporting 
Engineering Students Learning Wireless Network Planning Using Mobile, Positioning and Web 
Technologies"; Proc. 12th IEEE International Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies 
(ICALT 2012), IEEE Computer Society Press, Rome, Italy (2012), 509-514. 
[Bollen,  Eimler  et  al.  2012]  Bollen,  L.,  Eimler,  S.,  Jansen,  M.,  Engler,  J.:  "Enabling  and 
Evaluating  Mobile  Learning  Scenarios  with  Multiple  Input  Channels";  Proc.  18th  CRIWG 
Conference on Collaboration and Technology, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Raesfeld, Germany 
(2012), 161-175. 
[Bollen,  Jansen  et  al.  2012]  Bollen,  L.,  Jansen,  M.,  Eimler,  S.  C.:  "Towards  a  Multichannel 
Input  Dimension  in  Learning  Scenarios  with  Mobile  Devices";  Proc.  2012  IEEE  Seventh 
International Conference on Wireless, Mobile and Ubiquitous Technology in Education, IEEE 
Computer Society, Takamatsu, Japan (2012), 311-315. 
[Bollen, Juarez et al. 2006] Bollen, L., Juarez, G., Westermann, M., Hoppe, H. U.: "Pdas as 
Input  Devices  in  Brainstorming  and  Creative  Discussions";  Proc.  International  Workshop  on 

Jansen M., Bollen L., Baloian N., Hoppe H.U.: Using Cloud Services ...

2053

Wireless, Mobile and Ubiquitous Technologies in Education (WMUTE 2006), IEEE Computer 
Society, Athens, Greece (2006), 137-141. 
[Chappell  2008]  Chappell,  D.:  "A  Short  Introduction  to  Cloud  Platforms:  An  EnterpriseOriented 
View"; Chappel and Associates, San Francisco, CA (2008) 
[Chizmar,  Ostrosky  1998]  Chizmar,  J.  F.,  Ostrosky,  A.  L.:  "The  One-Minute  Paper:  Some 
Empirical Findings"; Journal of Economic Education, 29, 1 (1998), 3-10. 
[Dean, Ghemawat 2004] Dean, J., Ghemawat, S.: "Mapreduce: Simplified Data Processing on 
Large  Clusters";  Proc.  6th  Symposium  on  Operating  System  Design  and  Implementation, 
USENIX Association, San Francisco, California (2004) 
[Giemza,  Verheyen  et  al.  2012]  Giemza,  A.,  Verheyen,  P.,  Hoppe,  H.  U.:  "Challenges  in 
Scaling  Mobile  Learning  Applications:  The  Example  of  Quizzer";  Proc.  IEEE  Seventh 
International  Conference  on  Wireless,  Mobile  and  Ubiquitous  Technology  in  Education 
(WMUTE 2012), IEEE Computer Society, Takamatsu, Japan (2012), 311-315. 
[Jansen, Bollen et al. 2012] Jansen, M., Bollen, L., Schäfer, M.: "Integrating Social Networking 
Sites in Day-to-Day  Learning Scenarios"; Proc. International Conference on Education & ELearning 
Innovations (ICEELI 2012), Sousse,Tunisia (2012) 
[Liu,  Kao  2005]  Liu,  C.-C.,  Kao,  L.-C.:  "Handheld  Devices  with  Large  Shared  Display 
Groupware: Tools to Facilitate Group Communication in One-to-One Collaborative Learning 
Activities";  Proc.  Proceedings  of  3rd  IEEE  International  Workshop  in  Wireless  and  Mobile 
Technologies in Education, IEEE Computer Society, Tokushima, Japan (2005), 128-135. 
[Kroop  et  al.  2012]  Kroop,  S.,  Berthold,  M.,  Nussbaumer,  A.,  Albert,  D.:  Supporting  SelfRegulated 
 Learning  in  Personalised  Learning  Environments.  Proc.  of  the  1st  International 
Workshop on Cloud Education Environments, Antigua, Guatemala, November 2012, 47-52.  
[Neven,  Duval  2002]  Neven,  F.,  Duval,  E.:  "Reusable  Learning  Objects:  A  Survey  of  LomBased 
Repositories"; Proc. 10th ACM International Conference on Multimedia, ACM Juan les 
Pins, France (2002), 291-294. 
[Pettersson, Vogel 2012] Pettersson, O., Vogel, B.: "Reusability and Interoperability in Mobile 
Learning: A Study of Current Practices"; Proc. 2012 IEEE Seventh International Conference on 
Wireless,  Mobile  and  Ubiquitous  Technology  in  Education,  IEEE  Computer  Society, 
Takamatsu, Japan (2012), 311-315. 
[Rizzardini, Linares et al. 2012] Rizzardini, R. H., Linares, B., Mikroyannidis, A., Schmitz, H.-
C.:  "Cloud  Services  within  a  Role-Enabled  Personal  Learning  Environment";  Proc.  1st 
International  Workshop  on  Cloud  Education  Environments  (WCLOUD  2012),  CEUR 
Workshop Proceedings, Antigua, Guatemala (2012), 61-65. 
[Stead 2005] Stead, D. R.: "A Review of the One-Minute Paper"; Active Learning in Higher 
Education, 6, 2 (2005), 118-131. 
 
 

