Journal of Universal Computer Science, vol. 22, no. 10 (2016), 1360-1379
submitted: 24/3/16, accepted: 23/9/16, appeared: 1/10/16 © J.UCS

Introducing a Collaborative Tool Supporting a Learning 

Activity Involving Creativity with Rotation of Group 

 (Management Control and Information Systems, Faculty of Economics and Business 

Members 

Gustavo Zurita 

Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile 

gzurita@fen.uchile.cl) 

Nelson Baloian, José A. Pino 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 

(Department of Computer Science, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile 

{nbaloian@dcc.uchile.cl, jpino@dcc.uchile.cl) 

(American University of Armenia, Yerevan, Armenia 

Mary Boghosian 

mboghosian@aua.am) 

Abstract:  There  is  consensus  among  curriculum  developers  of  Business  Schools  that  along 
with technical knowledge students should also be trained to acquire soft skills. Communication, 
collaboration, creativity, critical thinking and problem solving are mentioned by some authors 
as the most important skills for professionals of the 21st century to be successful. Students must 
perform  learning  activities  applying  these  skills  in  order  to  develop  them.  In  this  work  we 
present a learning activity intended for Business students which requires creativity in order to 
be performed. We developed a collaborative tool to support this activity, called Sketchpad. The 
students who used the system evaluated the contribution of the designed activity to creativity 
and the ability of the tool to support it through an open questionnaire based on the Creativity 
Factor Evaluation (CSI). A second evaluation was done concerning Sketchpad’s collaborative 
support.  Both  studies  showed  a  positive  students’  perception  of  the  activity  and  tool  value 
according to these evaluation dimensions. 
 
Keywords: Creativity, Collaboration, Business Schools, Mobile Devices, Brain Sketching. 
Categories: L.2, L.2.3, L.6.2 

1 

Introduction  

There  is  currently  an  increasing  need  that  students  develop  not  only  technical 
competences  but  also  the  so  called  “soft  skills”  in  order  to  perform  professional 
activities in an effective and  efficient  way in a  globalized  world. This is especially 
valid for professionals of the business and economics field, who need to perform tasks 
in  a  highly  competitive,  changing  and  demanding  environment,  in  order  to  adapt 
themselves to the constant changes and generate strategies which provide added value 
to business practice. In order to achieve this goal it is necessary to include relevant 
pedagogical activities, methods and tools in their university curricula. 

[Griffin 11] presented the KSAVE (Knowledge, Skills, Attitudes, Values, Ethics) 
model  which  defines  ten  key  competences  professionals  of  the  21st  century  should 

Zurita G., Baloian N., Pino J.A., Boghosian M.: Introducing ...

1361

 

have in order to be successful. This model categorizes creativity as part of the Ways 
of Thinking competences, besides critical thinking, problem solving, decision making, 
learn to learn, and  meta-cognition. The operational definition of creativity provided 
by the KSAVE model includes knowledge, skills, and attitudes related to thinking and 
working  creatively,  individually  and  collaboratively.  In  the  same  way,  KSAVE 
highlights  the  importance  of  collaboration  and  communication  skills,  which  are 
named as Ways of Working skills.    

According to [Schlee 14], creativity and the ability of working in teams are the 
most relevant and required skills for professionals of the business area in order to be 
successful.  Moreover,  the  Association  to  Advance  Collegiate  Schools  of  Business 
mentioned  the  importance  of  considering  various  competences,  among  these 
creativity and the ability of working in teams, when designing curricula for business 
schools students [AACSB 13] which is in line with the KSAVE model. In 2015, the 
AACSB held various seminars on Curriculum Development Series. One of them was 
called  Teaching  Design  for  Creativity  and  Innovation  [AACSB15],  which  again 
highlights the importance of creativity as the way to cope with the requirements of the 
modern business environment. The Harvard Business Review also gives importance 
to creativity, publishing many articles on this subject [Harvard 15]. 

The  literature  reports  about  several  works  on  how  to  encourage  creativity  in 
university  students,  presenting  learning  activities  introduced  in  courses  in  business 
schools [Weisberg 93], [Mihai 12], [Yar 08], [Fairbank 01]. However, no one makes 
use  of  modern  technology  to  support  it.  Our  research  strategy  was  to  develop  a 
learning activity requiring creativity and then a collaborative tool to support it.  

This paper thus presents a pedagogical activity designed to help the development 
and application of skills and attitudes related to collaborative work and creativity in 
undergraduate students of a business school. The activity, which is performed inside 
the  classroom,  was  designed  according  to  previous  research  work  on  this  subject 
reported  by  the  literature.  It  is  supported  by  a  collaborative  application  called 
Sketchpad, running on wirelessly interconnected tablet PCs. Sketchpad was designed 
based on the principles of collaboration and externalization using brainsketching. The 
activity also incorporates rotation of students working in various groups on the same 
task, so they can enrich their ideas looking at the others’.  

In this scenario, the research work has been guided by the following questions: 
(1) According to the students’ perception, to what extent the activity supported by the 
provided tool (Sketchpad) contributes to the development of creativity?; (2) which is 
the  perception  the  students  get  about  the  contribution  of  Sketchpad  to  promote 
collaboration?; and 3) is there a difference in this perception when students work in 
groups where members have to rotate among the groups and when they not? 

 The activity and the tool were evaluated using two questionnaires. The students 
who used the system evaluated the contribution of the activity to creativity through an 
open  questionnaire  based  on  the  Creativity  Factor  Evaluation  (CSI)  [Carroll  09].  A 
second evaluation was done concerning Sketchpad collaborative support. Both studies 
showed  a  positive  students’  perception  of  the  activity  and  tool  value  according  to 
these evaluation dimensions. The results also show that students consider that rotation 
enhances  creativity  when  compared  to  working  without  rotation.  There  was  also 
positive  evidence  on  the  perception  students  had  about  the  ability  of  Sketchpad 
supporting collaboration and externalization.   

1362

Zurita G., Baloian N., Pino J.A., Boghosian M.: Introducing ...

The rest of the article is organized as follows. Chapter 2 examines creativity in 
general.  Chapter  3  explores  ways  of  stimulating  creativity  in  learning  activities. 
Chapter  4  deals  with  Sketchpad  development.  Chapter  5  contains  the  evaluation 
methodology, while Chapter 6 presents a discussion and the conclusions.  
This paper shows an extension of the work presented in [Zurita 15]. 

2  What is Creativity and which is the Role of Collaboration? 

Several  authors  and  experts  in  the  field  of  Creativity  have  attempted  to  define  it 
within the context of their studies. [Seeling 12] defines it as “provocative. Just one 
word … provocative”. [Gryskiewics 87] defined creativity as “novel associations that 
are useful”. [Noller 79] developed a symbolic equation for creativity as a function of 
Knowledge, Imagination, and Evaluation, reflecting an interpersonal attitude towards 
the beneficial and positive use of creativity. [Rhodes 61] compiled 56 definitions of 
Creativity  all  intertwined  and  overlapped,  from  which  [Isaksen  11]  described  a  six 
step process for Creative Problem Solving (CPS) based on the concept of creativity as 
being  a  whole  system  model  based  on  the  four  overlapping  themes  identified  by 
[Rhodes  61],  namely  Personsthe 
 characteristics  of  creative  people,  Processthe 

operations  within  the  creative  process,  Productthe 
 creative  results  and  outcomes, 
and  Pressthe 
 context  or  place  for  creativity  [Iseksen  84].  A  comprehensive  study 
and analysis on 91 exceptional individuals was conducted by [Csikszentmihalyi 96] to 
define  and  analyze  the  flow  of  creativity  and  the  psychology  of  discovery  and 
invention. This research observed creativity as interrelations  within a system  model 
made up of three parts: domain (cultures), field, and person.   

[Weisberg  93]  challenged  the  common  belief  that  product  novelty  requires 
creativity  to  come  from  extraordinary  and  unconscious  thinking,  sudden  leap  of 
insight,  or  possession  of  extraordinary,  genius,  flexibility,  and  sensitivity.  Using 
examples  from  general daily  life activities,  he proved that  creativity can also be an 
outcome of ordinary thinking, since ordinary thinking processes, which are based on 
continuity  with  the  past,  can  also  bring  about  novel  work  of  value  to  the  future, 
especially  when  they  are  subjected  to  a  radical  shift  or  discontinuity  in  thoughts, 
whether those are internal or external discontinuity thoughts. 

Creativity  within  the  context  of  organization  and  work  environment  is  best 
described by [Harvard 99] as that intertwined and complex system that exists within 
an  organization,  based  on  strong  internal  desire  (internal  motivation)  to  solve 
problems  leading  to  solutions,  due  to  interests  (expertise:  technical,  procedural  and 
intellectual  knowledge  that  the  person  possesses),  and  environment  stimulating 
imagination and creative problem solving. --In conclusion, creativity can be explained 
as  an  outcome  of  a  complex  dynamic  process  that  include  several  elements  for 
generating unique and valuable outcomes by transformation of existing ones  .  

2.1  Creative Thinking and Critical Thinking 
From  above,  it  becomes  clear  that  creative  thinking  is  the  generation  of  new 
knowledge and ideas within or across domains, intentionally breaking the established 
rules  and  processes.  It  includes  behaviors  such  as  preparation,  incubation,  insight, 
evaluation, elaboration, and communication. Creative thinking can be stimulated by 

Zurita G., Baloian N., Pino J.A., Boghosian M.: Introducing ...

1363

both unstructured process using brainstorming, and structured process using Lateral 
Thinking. The concept of lateral thinking was developed by [De Bobo 90] to describe 
the  process  of  using  information  to  bring  about  creativity  and  insight.  It  can  be 
learned,  practiced  and  used.  Unlike  Vertical  Thinking,  Lateral  Thinking  is  not 
analytical, does not seek clarity or a likely path, it involves restructuring, explores the 
least likely path to move in order to generate directions, new ideas, and new thinking 
leading  to  creative  results.  Like  brainstorming,  the  Lateral  Thinking  is  used  to 
generate new ideas, developing new properties, and new configurations from existing 
ones.  Brainstorming  processes  combine  the  Lateral  Thinking  and  the  Vertical 
Thinking for generation of new unstructured ideas.  

Creative  Thinking,  also  known  as  generating  (divergent)  thinking,  is  a  process 
requiring  starting  from  a  single  point,  from  a  single  question,  asking  as-many 
questions  and  seeking  as-many  answers  as  possible  to  extend  the  search  in  many 
different directions, generating wide variety of new ideas. Questions need to be openended,
  effective,  poking,  and  generative  looking  for  gaps,  paradoxes,  opportunities, 
challenges,  concerns,  and  searching  for  meaningful  new  connections,  new 
possibilities  from  different  viewpoints  or  perspective,  and  seeking  unusual,  nonstandard 
 possibilities  and  details  to  expand  or  enrich  the  existing  ones.  Critical 
Thinking,  on  the  other  hand,  also  known  as  focusing  (convergent)  thinking,  is  a 
process  that  attempts  to  identify  many  different  ideas  and  challenging  assumptions, 
draws  them  together  towards  a  single  goal  or  result  through  recognizing  the 
importance of the context, exploring alternatives, and developing a concluding action 
plan. It involves examining the different ideas and possibilities carefully, fairly, and 
constructively,  then  focusing  all  thoughts  and  actions  by  organizing  and  analyzing 
possibilities,  refining  and  developing  promising  solutions,  choosing,  ranking  or 
prioritizing and deciding on final options.  

2.2  Creative Problem Solving 
Creativity and creative thinking are closely linked to Creative Problem Solving (CPS) 
[Isaksen 85], as both seek new unstructured, open ended outcomes and opportunities, 
overcome  challenges,  encouraging 
innovation,  closing  gaps  and  clearing 
uncertainties, and meeting new solutions and opportunities. Creative Problem Solving 
is also  linked closely  to the  critical thinking as  they both need to reach to a  novel, 
workable, satisfying close ended solution and opportunity, recognizing and exploring 
alternatives,  then  focusing  constructively  on  a  workable  solution.  Therefore,  the 
successful  CPS  process  is  dependent  on  both  generating  and  focusing  parts  - 
divergent  and  convergent  thinking  -  drawing  from  the  entire  system  of  people, 
method,  and  content  and  context  approach  of  both  parts.  [Rhodes  61;  Isaksen  85] 
describe the CPS as a six stage process of continuously generating and focusing ideas 
to understand the challenge, generate ideas, and prepare for action from constructing 
opportunities,  exploring  data,  framing  problems,  to  generating  ideas,  developing 
solutions and building acceptance. One can draw similarities between this process and 
the Global Sharing Pedagogy (GSP), which constitute the basis for learning in digital 
storytelling [Niemi 14] and brainsketching [Van der Lugt 02], thus basing both on the 
same  principles  namely,  interpretation  and  validation  of  ideas  and  knowledge, 
collaboration,  exchange  of  information,  and  networking:  the  same  skills  called  for 
21st Century teaching and assessment for business leaders, politicians, and educators. 

1364

Zurita G., Baloian N., Pino J.A., Boghosian M.: Introducing ...

2.3  Creativity and Collaboration 
Some authors have already touched the topic of collaboration in creativity and tools 
supporting  it  [Mamikaya  02].  For  training  students  in  developing  creative  skills  is 
necessary to introduce collaborative activities [Fairbank 01]. Technology should help 
according to the complexity of them, including emotional, motivational, cognitive and 
metacognitive, individual and social aspects of the process of learning. Technology 
allows students to learn at any time, to participate when they want to, without feeling 
intimidated by others, and go at their own pace [O'Donell 2013], in addition, it may 
provide  evidence  for  the  teachers  and  students  of  the  student’s  progress  and  allow 
teachers  to  give  a  precise  feedback  according  to  the  necessities  of  students. 
Incorporating technology in education has been quite successful, even within off-line 
courses  there  have  been  experiences  in  carrying  out  paperless  courses  in  which  the 
whole material has been electronically distributed through Tablet PCs [Fons 2010].  

For  communicating  with  others  and  solving  problems,  sketching  may  be  used 
successfully. First because there is a process in which individuals can externalize their 
ideas through a sketch and watch the problem from an “outside” perspective allowing 
them to analyse their own thoughts from outside; and second, because sketches can be 
used to explain one’s ideas and to build shared understanding [Fischer 2004]. 

Therefore,  research  should  be  conducted  and  technologies  should  be  developed 
for  creatively  solving  highly  complex  problems  with  highly  effective  collaborative 
networks  and  teams,  in  large  diverse  and  internationally  dispersed  as  well  as  small 
local  coherent  groups.  Detailed  investigation  into  the  process  of  CPS,  and  the 
collaboration and networking process is required. The kind of approach to sharing and 
exchanging information at every step of the CPS also needs to be studied. 

In this work we focus only on the relation between collaboration and creativity by 
presenting  and  evaluating  a  collaborative  learning  activity  and  a  tool  supporting  it, 
which allows students to train their creativity by developing ideas (like new business 
proposals or ways to use technology to improve life in their communities)  within a 
group, sharing them with other groups, and improving their initial proposal with the 
help of the ideas of their classmates.   

3  Supporting Creativity Development 

The complexity of teaching students to be creative lies in the fact we cannot teach that 
skill but to foster its development through educational activities that include specific 
design principles, pedagogical practices that generated positive previous experiences 
based on theories explaining how to generate creativity [Rotherham 09].  

The  design  principles  of  the  pedagogical  activity,  and  consequently  of  the  tool 
supporting  it,  presented  in  this  work  are  based  on  a  pedagogical  frame  that 
incorporates  mainly  two  elements:  collaboration  and  externalization.  Regarding 
collaboration,  [Fischer  04]  proposes  that  creativity  emerges  from  the  interactions 
between individuals and the world, and between the individual and others; in the same 
way,  [Csikszentmihalyi  96]  emphasizes  human  interaction  as  the  place  where 
creativity  emerges.  [Fischer  04]  adopts  a  similar  approach  when  proposing  that 
creativity  lies  in  interactions  between  persons’  thoughts  and  their  socio  cultural 
context. [Sawyer 11] proposes that creativity breakthroughs occur during the dialog 

Zurita G., Baloian N., Pino J.A., Boghosian M.: Introducing ...

1365

among  persons  when  they  answer  to  each  other;  this  contrasts  with  the  myth  of 
individual inspiration, which represents the idea that creative inspiration comes from 
the individual. Likewise, [Hennessy 11] identify that the base of creativity lies in the 
tension between different perspectives. Therefore, interactions among people having 
different  points  of  view,  which  are  in  opposition  (tension),  can  be  the  base  for  a 
suitable activity where creative ideas may arise. From the importance of collaboration 
we  can  derive  the  convenience  of  designing  activities  that  include  intensive  and 
varied  interaction  with  other  persons,  allowing  the  sharing  and  discussion  of  ideas, 
and  observing  new  points  of  view.  The  second  element  of  creativity  we  consider, 
externalization, refers to “taking out of her/himself” the ideas and thoughts in order to 
translate  them  in  concrete  artefacts  representing  them,  in  order  to  make  them 
accessible  for  working  and  reflect  about  them  [Bruner  96].  This  attribute  of 
externalization is based on what [Schön 83] calls the “back-talk”. The meaning is that 
the  process  of  externalizing  ideas  can  unveil  questions  about  them  which  were 
initially ignored, facilitate the emergence of new perspectives, show new possibilities 
or  obstacles,  as  well  as  new  relationships  to  other  ideas.  Sketching,  drawing  and 
diagramming are good examples of externalization processes [Antunes 13], which can 
facilitate  creative  work  and  foster  the  development  of  this  competence.  From  the 
advantages  of  externalization  we  can  derive  the  usefulness  of  designing  activities 
which include the elaboration of sketches or other forms of graphic expression [Zurita 
08]. 

The literature reports on a number of pedagogical practices that make no use of 
technology which are aimed at fostering expressiveness and externalization in order to 
stimulate creativity. Some of them make use of various methods which combine the 
collaborative exchange of ideas [Guzdial 01] based on drawing and sketching [Van 
der Lugt 02; Lane 10]. The simplest case is the brainsketching technique [Pickens 80], 
in which students first draw their ideas individually and then exchange them, so that 
other participant can complement or modify them, either silently or explaining them 
at the  moment they pass  them to other participants [Linsey 11]. A  more elaborated 
version is C-sketch, which was conceived to foster collaboration in industrial design. 
Five persons work individually on a problem simultaneously proposing a solution by 
drawing  a  sketch.  After  this,  they  pass  their  sketches  to  the  following  person  who 
complements,  modifies  or  deletes  parts  of  the  original  design.  Sketches  are  passed 
among the members of the group until each participant has worked on each proposal 
once, thus incorporating the aspect of rotation of the ideas to implement collaborative 
work [Shah 01]. 
    There is positive evidence about the use of technology for supporting brainstorming 
processes using sketches and drawings, although not precisely focused on creativity 
support: Inkboard [Beavers 04], Collboard [Alvarez 13], Magic Paper [Beavers 04], 
and Co-lab [Van Joolingen 05] are some examples.  

Inkboard  was  designed  to  be  used  along  with  videoconferencing,  where 
participants  synchronously  can  draw  sketches  over  a  shared  workspace  (a  virtual 
board)  [Beavers  04].  Collboard,  incorporates  collaborative  elements  and  freehand 
sketches  using  digital  pens  and  interactive  boards  with  private  and  public  spaces; 
sketches first drawn on private workspaces can be then shared in public ones in order 
to continue working collaboratively [Alvarez 13]. Magic paper was developed by the 

1366

Zurita G., Baloian N., Pino J.A., Boghosian M.: Introducing ...

MIT  and  allows  teacher  and  students  to  draw  physical  models  on  a  virtual  board 
working collaboratively [Beavers 04].   

All  mentioned  applications  use  technology  to  support  creativity.  A  common 
aspect to all of them is that participants first develop ideas individually and then share 
them, in order to converge to a single idea collaboratively; therefore we incorporate 
this  aspect  in  the  design  of  Sketchpad.  Another  common  aspect  of  all  mentioned 
applications is that working groups remain static during the whole activity.  

Regarding  pedagogical  practices  in  business  schools’  curricula  for  developing 
creativity  skills  in  students,  the  literature  reports  some  research  works  made  on 
pedagogical methodologies introduced in the courses of their curricula. For example 
in the year 2007, the Creative Marketing Breakthrough (CMB) presents a reference 
frame for the development of creativity in lectures through specific activities related 
to  Marketing  [Titus  07]. The  CMB  model  defines  creativity  as  the  process  through 
which disruptive ideas are generated, and considers five theoretical concepts as its key 
elements: (1) task motivation, (2) cognitive flexibility, (3) disciplinary knowledge, (4) 
serendipity  and  (5)  uncertainty  [Titus  07].  [Aylesworth  08]  proposed  to  develop 
creativity in the business classroom through the improve-mindset based on the use of 
techniques  of  theater  improvisation  applied  to  discussion  of  case  analysis.  For  this 
purpose,  students  must  follow  five  steps  of  theater  improvisation:  (1)  "Yes,  and…” 
they have to accept what their classmates say and add something to it. They cannot 
deny  or  reject  what  others  previously  said.  (2)  “Deny,  order,  repeat  and question”, 
none of these actions is permitted. (3) “Driving in the rearview mirror”, they have to 
build  on  the  context  proposed  at  the  beginning.  (4)  “Take  Care  of  yourself  …  by 
Taking Care of Everyone Else”, collaboration instead of competition is promoted. (5) 
“Mistakes are good offers in disguise”, there are no mistakes during the discussion 
since  all  ideas  can  lead  to  new  perspectives  and  better  understanding  of  the  case 
[Aylesworth 08]. The improve-mindset is meant to generate a collaborative and highly 
participative atmosphere in the classroom, which leads to spontaneity and creativity. 

We think it is  worthwhile to  explore  which  is  the role technology can play for 
developing creativity in students of a business school, like for example, using tablets 
for supporting externalization through brainsketching. 

4  Sketchpad Design 

Sketchpad  is  a  collaborative  tool  running  on  tablets  (specifically  iPads)  which  was 
designed  and  developed  to  support  pedagogical  activities  aimed  at  developing 
creativity  in  fourth  year  undergraduate  students  at  the  Business  School  of  the 
University of Chile. It has been implemented using HTML5 and the Coupled Object 
technology (described in [Frez 12; Baloian 13]) so it can be run using web browsers 
Chrome, Mozilla, or Safari regardless from the operative system of the computational 
device. Its main interface, shown in Figure 1, consists of a workspace, which can be 
private  or  shared,  where  the  user  creates  sketches  by  freehand  drawing  and  text 
typewriting,  including  basic  edition  functionalities  like  deleting,  copy  and  paste, 
undo, redo, changing colors, zooming in and out, etc.  
 
 
 

Zurita G., Baloian N., Pino J.A., Boghosian M.: Introducing ...

1367

 

 

Figure 1: Main interface of Sketchpad showing in the main workspace a proposal for 
the design of “technological bus stop”; that is being edited collaboratively. The 
selected page (highlighted with a blue frame) is in the public (“Groupal”) area. 

Students  can  make  their  contributions  through  brainsketching  to  several 
individual and/or shared pages but they can work on one at a time only. Icons with a 
small  view  of  the  page  content  are  shown  at  the  right  hand  side  of  the  interface, 
separated in two areas: private (“Personal”) and public (“Groupal”). The page that is 
currently edited is highlighted with a blue frame (Figure 1). In order to share a private 
page the user has simply to drag and drop its icon from the private to the public area. 
A copy of the page  will appear in the public area, keeping the original page in the 
private one. After this, all users participating in the session will see this page as a new 
icon in the public area. They can start working collaboratively by selecting it, clicking 
on the icon. Figure 1 shows that the user has created two private pages; one of them 
has been copied to the shared area and has received another icon of someone else who 
shared a page. The second public page is highlighted with a blue frame indicating that 
the  user  is  currently  working  on  it,  thus  it  is  shown  in  the  main  workspace  at  the 
center  of  the  interface.  By  sketching,  students  can  externalize  ideas  and  proposals, 
thus promoting creativity [Bruner 96; Zurita 08]. [Bruner 96] and [Schön 83] mention 
the advantages of translating ideas into sketches. Collaborative work using Sketchpad 
is aimed at promoting creativity as stated by [Csikszentmihalyi 96; Fischer 04] and 
[Sawyer 11], who say that the base for creativity lies in the interaction  with others. 
The  easy  way  that  students  can  access  the  working  pages  in  the  collaborative  area 
contributes  to  the  tool  transparency  (section  3.2).  Sketchpad  implements  some 
functionalities in order to easily include participants in a group and also to exclude 

1368

Zurita G., Baloian N., Pino J.A., Boghosian M.: Introducing ...

them. This, and the fact that Sketchpad can be used on tablets make it easy to perform 
rotations of students among the groups. The rotation strategy is a way to get students 
involved in the others‘ proposals and create positive interdependencies [Guerrero 03]. 
We think the more students can contribute to one idea or proposal, the better will be 
the exploration factor described in section 3.2, since various points of view can defy 
the thinking and knowledge structures previously built.  

5  Evaluation of the Sketchpad´s Contribution to Creativity and 

Collaborative Support 

Sketchpad was tested in a real classroom in order to formally evaluate how students 
perceived its contribution to two strongly related aspects. The first aspect is related to 
the  support  level  Sketchpad  is  able  to  provide  for  performing  the  learning  activity 
requiring creativity and the second, the support level Sketchpad is sable to provide for 
performing  a  collaborative  activity.  This  second  aspect  will  be  tested  under  two 
working  modality:  one  without  reconfiguration  of  groups  and  the  other  with 
reconfiguration.  In  the  second  modality  students  will  have  to  work  with  different 
groups at different stages of the activity, leaving a group and joining another several 
times.  The  reason  for  introducing  reconfiguration  of  groups  can  be  found  in  other 
works which have presented learning activities which also include this aspect [Chang 
09], [Jonassen 99], [Zurita 05]. This is a way to allow students get inspired by looking 
into others’ ideas and at the same time contribute with the ideas seen in one group to 
another.  

The first aspect of the evaluation answers the research question (1) According to 
the  students’  perception,  to  what  extent  the  activity  supported  by  Sketchpad 
contributes to the development of creativity?; and the second to the following two: (2) 
which  is  the  perception  the  students  get  about  the  contribution  of  Sketchpad  to 
promote collaboration?; and (3) is there a difference in this perception when students 
work in groups  where  members have to rotate among the  various  groups and  when 
they do not? 

The current study employs mainly a quantitative design in order to evaluate both 
mentioned  aspects  [Creswell  09].  First,  quantitative  students’  perception  data  were 
analyzed to evaluate the support level Sketchpad provides for developing a learning 
activity  requiring  creativity  through  an  open  questionnaire  based  on  the  Creativity 
Factor Index (CSI) [Carroll 09]; in addition to qualitative data, open answer questions 
and  observation  records  were  used  as  complementary  data  to  support  quantitative 
findings.  Second,  quantitative  students’  perception  data  were  analyzed  to  measure 
Sketchpad’s contribution to collaboration for each of the two mentioned modalities, 
with and without group reconfiguration. Based on these results we could evaluate if 
there  was  a  difference  between  the  students’  perception  when  working  on  one  or 
another modality, for which a quasi-experimental design was conducted.  

Participants  were  students  of  a 

Information” 
undergraduate course with students of the Business and Economics Faculty, from the 
Universidad of Chile. Nineteen students (13 men and 6 women, average age = 22.7 
years) were randomly assigned to six groups consisting of three students each and one 
of  four  students;  three  of  these  groups  were  part  of  the  experimental  group  (EG)  – 

fourth-year  “Technology 

Zurita G., Baloian N., Pino J.A., Boghosian M.: Introducing ...

1369

students  working  with  rotation,  and  the  other  three  were  a  control  group  (CG)  – 
students  working  without  rotation.  The  group  with  four  students  was  part  of  the 
control group. 

A  week  before  the  experiment,  all  students  were  instructed  in  the  use  of 
Sketchpad, and how to propose a creative idea. The actual learning activity was done 
during a regular class during 90 minutes, where all students from the EG and the CG 
were  asked  to  work  collaboratively  to  identify  requirements  that  people  have  in  a 
common  bus  stop,  in  Santiago  de  Chile,  and  together  make  a  single  creative 
technological  proposal  to  fulfill  those  requirements.  For  performing  the  learning 
activity each student received an iPad where they could run Sketchpad by invoking 
the URL of the server where it was deployed. Students were asked to jointly propose 
an  idea  per  group  using  Sketchpad  working  collaboratively  face-to-face,  generating 
first  various  ideas  (divergent  phase  of  creation),  share  them  among  the  group 
members and then come up with an one they consider the most creative (convergent 
phase of creation). In this way, the learning activity and the use of Sketchpad address 
“collaboration” and “communication” (to externalize ideas) aspects mentioned as part 
of the 21st century skills, when searching for a creative idea proposal.   

 

 

Figure 2: The figure shows a descriptive schema of the collaborative activity during 
rotations among group members. The four statuses show the composition of the 
groups after the rotations indicated by the arrows. 

As already mentioned, rotation in the EG was included in order to observe if this 
aspect allows them to benefit from a wider range of possibilities and viewpoints. We 
focused  on  supporting  collaboration  as  much  as  possible  and  giving  students  the 
possibility  to  evaluate  and  approach  the  problem  from  different  perspectives. 
Therefore, two students of each experimental group had to rotate to the group next to 

1370

Zurita G., Baloian N., Pino J.A., Boghosian M.: Introducing ...

them,  in  order  to  see  the  other  group’s  solution  and  share  their  own.  They  did  this 
until they rotated among all the other groups and viewed all other proposed solutions. 
After  finishing  the  rotation,  they  joined  their  original  group  and  helped  modifying 
their original solution, inspired from ideas seen in other groups. The control groups 
performed  the  activity  without  rotation,  i.e.,  only  sharing  ideas  among  their  own 
groups.   

Figure  2  shows  schematically  how  rotations  were  performed.  There  were  three 
working groups G1, G2 and G3, each one with three students. The first sketch (upper 
right) shows status 1, where participants are in the original arrangement. The second 
sketch (upper right, status 2) shows the groups after two students have moved to the 
next group. The third sketch (bottom right, status 3) shows the groups after the second 
rotation.  The  fourth  sketch  (bottom  left,  status  4)  shows  the  groups  after  the  final 
rotation where students return to their original groups. It is important to highlight that 
sketches do not rotate, but only the students. So when students arrive to a new group 
they  have  to  join  the  new  group  by  joining  the  public  session  in  which  the  sketch 
corresponding to that group is being worked out. This activity shares some similarities 
with brainsketching, Gallery method and C-sketch, because it involves sketching and 
the possibility of having various perspectives on them. The main difference lies on the 
interaction  with  other  group  members  before  producing  the  final  proposal  of  the 
group. Figure 3 shows a picture taken during the learning activity. 

 

Figure 3: The picture shows a room layout where students performed the 
collaborative activity with Sketchpad. Note that the furniture eases the rotation of the 
team members. 

The next subsections describe the evaluations and results of this activity, by using 

a questionnaire applied to the students 45 minutes after completing it.  

 

Zurita G., Baloian N., Pino J.A., Boghosian M.: Introducing ...

1371

Evaluating the Level of Creativity Support Provided by Sketchpad 

5.1 
[Carroll,  09]  proposed  a  new  and  revised  tool  based  on  a  questionnaire  called 
Creativity Support Index (CSI), which was designed to help researchers and designers 
evaluate the level of creativity support provided by any technological application used 
in situations where there is participant collaboration. The CSI encompasses six factors 
related  to  creativity,  which  are  presented  bellow  along  with  the  assertions  used  to 
measure it, which were included in the questionnaire applied to the students:  
(1)  Collaboration: “The system/tool allowed other people to work with me easily”. 
Authors justify this question due to that collaboration is a very important aspect 
of creativity support that must be measured individually  

(2)   Exploration:  “It  was  easy  for  me  to  explore  many  different  ideas,  options, 

(3)  Expressiveness,  (or  externalization):  “I  was  able  to  be  very  expressive  and 

designs, or outcomes”. 

creative while doing the activity”. 

(4)  Results worth effort: “What I was able to produce was worth the effort I had to 

(5)  Immersion: “My attention was fully tuned to the activity, and I forgot about the 

exert to produce it”. 

system I was using”.  

(6)  Enjoyment:  “I  was  very  engaged  in  this  activity  -  I  enjoyed  this  activity  and 

would do it again”.  
Students  had  to  express  their  agreement  to  each  assertion  using  a  Likert  scale. 
Additionally,  there  was  a  questionnaire  with  open  answers  aimed  at  evaluating  the 
interaction  among  participants  and  their  opinion  about  the  possibility  the  activity 
gives  them  to  approach  the  problem  from  different  points  of  views,  which  is 
important  for  boosting  the  creativity  process.  We  also  included  an  external  viewer 
who registered aspects about collaboration and externalization.  

The  CSI  tool  was  applied  in  two  steps.  In  the  first  step,  students  answered  the 
questionnaire  presented  above  by  using  a  six  points  Likert  scale,  assigning  values 
from “totally disagree” to “totally agree” to five assertions, each one expressing that 
according  to  their  opinion,  Sketchpad  was  able  to  support  one  of  the  six  factors 
(collaboration, exploration and expressiveness - externalization, results worth effort, 
immersion, and enjoyment). In the second step, students were presented with a list of 
all six possible factor pairs. Since there are six factors, the list consisted of 15 pairs. 
From each pair they had to select which factor they considered more important than 
the other one for performing the activity.  

Therefore,  the  obtained  data  was  also  analyzed  in  two  steps.  First,  the  data 
collected  with  the  CSI  questionnaire  were  processed  according  to  what  the  authors 
propose  in  [Carroll  09]  in  order  to  generate  values  from  0  to  100  for  each  factor. 
Second, the data was processed for obtaining descriptive statistical information using 
a standard software application (SPSS). One assertion of the CSI questionnaire was 
slightly  changed  for  the  collaboration  factor  from  “The  system/tool  allowed  other 
people to work with me easily”, with “Sketchpad allowed other people to work with 
me  easily”.  On  another  hand,  the  data  obtained  by  the  observations  were  analyzed 
manually. As we mention before, the activity was performed during a normal class, 
after which the questionnaire was applied.  

1372

Zurita G., Baloian N., Pino J.A., Boghosian M.: Introducing ...

5.2  Results of the Sketchpad Contribution to Creativity 
Results associated to the CSI questionnaire are shown in Table 1. According to them, 
Sketchpad favors creativity on a 67.85 level, from 0 to 100. Students who participated 
in the activity with rotation evaluated better the support of the technological tool with 
a CSI of 75.07, compared with a CSI of 58.96 from the students who participated in 
the  activity  without  rotation.  Yet,  this  difference  is  not  statistically  significant  and 
cannot be generalized. Now we will analyze the CSI factors applied to Sketchpad, this 
is the pairwise comparison of the factors: a) collaboration was the factor which was 
perceived as the most relevant by the students who worked with rotation as well as by 
the  students  who  worked  without  rotation;  b)  exploration  and  expressiveness 
(externalization)  are  the  factors  which  come  next,  and  are  within  the  53.2%  of  the 
total relevance of the factors, therefore, we can consider that Sketchpad supports the 
expression  and  exploration  of  the  proposed  ideas;  c)  although  results  worth  effort 
factor  received  a  good  evaluation  (VP  =  6.97),  it  was  seldom  selected  as  the  most 
relevant factor for performing the activity d) Also the immersion was well evaluated 
but  was  seldom  regarded  as  important  for  the  activity;  e)  enjoyment  was  the  factor 
with the lowest evaluation and the least important for performing the activity. 
 

 

FACTOR 

Collaboration 
Exploration 
Expressiveness (Externalization) 
Results worth effort 
Immersion 
Enjoyment  
 

Total 

Group without  
Rotation - CG 

Group with 
Rotation - EG 

VP  Rate  ANF VP  Rate  ANF  VP  Rate 
5.32 17.73
7.60  25.33 
6.40 21.33
5.86 15.63
7.60  15.20 
6.68 17.82
6.58 13.16
7.80  15.60 
7.16 14.32
6.58
6.58 
6.97
9.29 
7.40  14.80 
6.20  4.13 
4.15 
6.22
4.14 
6.21
6.20  0.00 
1.71 
0.94 
5.14
5.64
67.85        Rate: 
58.96        Rate: 
75.07 

5 
4 
3 
1.5 
1 
0.5 

5 
3 
3 
3 
1 
0 

ANF 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 

      Rate: 

 
ANF = mean number of times this factor was selected as the more important in the pair wise 
comparison; VP = Average score assigned by the students to each factor computed as (number 
of  times  the  factor  was  selected  *ANF)/1.5.  Rate=  the  rate  of  the  factor  according  to  the 
answers to the Likert scale evaluation, modified according to the CSI to obtain values between 
0 and 100. 

Table 1: Results of the first part of the questionnaire 

From the analysis of the answers given to the open answers questionnaire related 
to  the  aspects  of  interaction  among  participants,  approaching  the  problem  from 
various points of view and having them included in the final proposal, the possibility 
to  approach  the  solution  we  can  conclude  the  following  remarks:  a)  regarding  the 
ability of the activity and the tool to support interaction among participants, students 
in general responded with totally agree, or strongly agree; they said they could discuss 
with their classmates various ways to approach the problem and the ideas that were 
proposed.  Only  5%  of  the  answers  were  negative.  b)  Regarding  the  ability  for 
approaching the solution through various points of view the perception of the students 
was also positive and most answers were totally agree, strongly agree or agree. Again 
only 5% were negative. c) Regarding the ability to contribute from various points of 
view to the final result, students said they could know ideas from other participants 

Zurita G., Baloian N., Pino J.A., Boghosian M.: Introducing ...

1373

and this helped to refine the final proposal. Most answers to this assertion were totally 
agreed, strongly agree or agree. Only 7.9% of the answers was negative.  

The  analysis  of  the  observation  guideline  has  shown  that  students  actively 
interacted with their classmates, sharing their ideas and explaining them to the rest. 
Then students proceeded to merge the individual proposals. In this way, new solutions 
emerged  from  the  elements  of  the  initially  proposed  ideas  and  the  discussion. 
Sketchpad  obtained  a  good  rate  (67.85)  thus  we  can  consider  that  according  to 
students’  opinion,  it  contributes  to  the  development  of  a  learning  activity  requiring 
creativity. Moreover, when having various points of views, which was the case for the 
students  working  with rotations, the rate  was even better than for  students  working 
without  (75.07  for  the  EG  against  58.96  for  the  CG).  During  the  discussion  the 
individual  ideas  complemented  each  other  and  disagreements  were  part  of  the 
merging  process.  New  ideas  emerged  when  individual  proposals  were  challenged 
transforming  the  original  ones  in  new  contributions.  Sketches  made  individually 
helped  students  to  explain  their  proposals  promoting  discussion  among  them.  We 
observed that the number of ideas proposed by the groups which worked with rotation 
was higher than the number of ideas generated by the groups without rotation. 
 

     

 
)
1
D

(

 
 
 
 
t
r
o
p
p
u
s
 
n
o
i
t
a
r
o
b
a
l
l
o
C

 

o
t
 
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
n
o
c
 
d
a
p
h
c
t
e
k
S

 
 

n
o
i
t
a
r
o
b
a
l
l
o
c

 
)
2
D

(
 

 
SD1.1 

SD1.2 

SD1.3 

SD2.1 

SD2.2 

SD2.3 

Assertions 

(1) The activity promotes interaction among students. (2) We were able to discuss 
each other’s ideas. (3) We could discuss how to approach the solution. 
(1) The interaction with other participants allowed me to learn different points of 
view. (2) The interaction with other participants allowed me to see the problem 
from various perspectives. (3) The interaction with other participants allowed me 
to think about various solutions to the problem.  
(1) The interaction with other participants was very important for the final 
solution proposal. (2) Knowing other groups’ solutions influenced the final 
solution proposed by my group (for experimental group only). (3) Knowing the 
ideas of my group members was of great help for proposing the final solution. 
(1) Sketchpad facilitated the Exchange of ideas between participants.  
(2) Sketchpad was useful for sharing sketches with other members of the group. 
(3) Sketchpad helped me to better explain my own ideas to other participants.  
(4) Sketchpad helped me to better understand other participants’ ideas.  
(5) Sketchpad helped me to better explain the ideas of my group to the members 
of the other groups (for control group only). 
(1) Sketching helped me gain new perspectives of my own idea.  
(2) Sketching helped me to better understand the problem addressed.  
(3) Sketching helped me think about solutions I did not considered first.  
(4) Sketching helped me to communicate my ideas in a better way. 
 (1) The activity could not have been carried out in the same way without 
Sketchpad. 

Table 2: Student assertions regarding Collaboration and Sketchpad contribution. 

Evaluating the Sketchpad Support to Collaboration 

5.3 
After completing the activity, students answered a questionnaire related to it and the 
Sketchpad  tool  to  evaluate  the  contribution  to  collaboration.  The  questionnaire  was 

1374

Zurita G., Baloian N., Pino J.A., Boghosian M.: Introducing ...

designed  to  measure  two  dimensions:  Collaboration  support  (D1)  and  Sketchpad 
contribution to collaboration (D2) during the activity in the classroom. 

Each dimension was divided into three sub dimensions each: SD1.1 = interaction, 
SD1.2  =  approaching  through  various  viewpoints,  SD1.3  =  integration  of  various 
points of view in the final solution, SD2.1 = contribution to collaboration, SD2.2 = 
contribution to sketching, SD2.3 = contribution of technology. The sub dimensions of 
D1  were  extracted  from  [O'Donnell  13].  The  questionnaire  also  included  a  box  of 
comments. 

The  questionnaire  contained  a  set  of  assertions  to  which  the  students  had  to 
express  their  agreement  or  disagreement  using  a  6-point  Likert  scale  (1=  totally 
disagree  2=  strongly  disagree  3=  disagree  4=  agree  5=  strongly  agree  6=  totally 
agree).  For  the  analysis,  a  majority  of  responses  from  1  to  3  represents  a  negative 
result and majority from 4 to 6 is a positive result. The questionnaire also included a 
box  of  comments.  Table  2  shows  in  detail  the  assertions  presented  to  the  students 
associated with the two dimensions and the six sub dimensions evaluated. 

5.4  Result of the Sketchpad Contribution to Collaboration 
Figure  4  shows  percentages  of  the  Likert-type  answers  showing  the  students’ 
perception regarding the assertions for Collaboration support (D1) and for Sketchpad 
contribution to collaboration (D2) to the learning activity. Numbers are given for the 
CG and EG. The data shows that students of both EG and CG tend to positively agree 
with the assertions of the Collaboration support dimension. Agree, strongly agree and 
totally  agree  numbers  add  up  to  90.1%.  An  interesting  result  is  the  much  higher 
percentage  of  students  of  the  EG  who  “totally  agree”  with  the  assertions  compared 
with the CG on all sub-dimensions. These results indicate that the activity supported 
by Sketchpad including rotation increases the possibility of interacting and discussing 
with peers, as well as obtaining and developing different perspectives. 

We  also  observe  that  for  the  assertions  related  to  Sketchpad  contribution  to 
collaboration  dimension  the  answers  from  the  students  were  positive  in  both,  the 
control and experimental group. In fact, percentage of all  positive answers (“totally 
agree”, “strongly agree” and “agree”) is 66.31%. This indicates that the perception the 
students  have about the contribution of Sketchpad is overall positive. Moreover, its 
facility  of  using  sketches  allows  for  a  better  expression  of  ideas,  obtaining  new 
perspectives, and supporting the activity. Once again responses tend to be much more 
positive  among  students  from  the  experimental  groups,  indicating  that  students’ 
perceive Sketchpad to be useful for supporting a collaborative activity with rotation.  
Regarding the students’ comments, there were four aspects which were frequently 
mentioned:  a)  Sketchpad  presented  some  problems  that  should  be  corrected 
(mentioned 17 times). The problems mentioned were mainly technical problems and a 
few about design and usability: “I had problems when I wanted to move my personal 
slide to the group space. Some images appeared in different places of the slide and the 
application sometimes got stuck when working collaboratively. The application is a 
little bit slow loading and performing some instructions”. “The tool must be improved 
with more functions, for example, something to erase parts of the sketch”. b) There is 
a positive perception of the activity and the utility of the tool (mentioned 10 times): 
“If the problems of this prototype are solved this tool would be very useful to support 
better  group  work”.  “The  activity  was  very  good,  no  complaints”.  c)  The  technical 

Zurita G., Baloian N., Pino J.A., Boghosian M.: Introducing ...

1375

problems  the  tool  has  are  an  obstacle  for  an  optimal  performance  of  the  activity 
(mentioned 3 times): “Moreover, it is necessary that the tool works in an optimal way. 
It is critical that the users know how to use it; otherwise it will block creativity while 
sketching solutions. It also hinders the individual and collaboration. I did not know 
how to edit something or when I did not know which button I should use to create a 
rectangle, etc.” d) Sketching helps them express and understand ideas (mentioned 2 
times): “Sketching ideas is much better than explaining them with a text”. 

 

Figure 4: Percentages of questionnaire answers for CG=Control Group, EG=Experimental 

Group 

 

6  Discussion 

The obtained results allow us to answer positively to the research question about the 
perception students get regarding the contribution of  Sketchpad to the collaborative 
activity. They expressed they could interact with the rest of the participants during the 
activity  and  that  this  interaction  was  fruitful.  This  assertion  is  backed  by  the  67.85 
over 100 score they assigned to the creativity factor of the tool. In the same way, we 
can  conclude  that  students  had  a  positive  perception  about  working  with  rotations, 
since students  who  worked this  way evaluated all factors better than those  working 
without rotations. Performing the activity with rotations gave students the opportunity 
to get acquainted with various points of view, often different from their own ones, in a 
short period of time and considering them when preparing the final proposal. In this 
way,  we  wanted  to  shape  a  pedagogical  activity  with  a  strong  collaborative 
component.  This  has  been  backed  by  the  observations  of  a  collaborative  activity 
performed by students, where we identified that new ideas emerged from discussions 
among  participants.  Another  key  element  considered  for  shaping  the  activity  was 
externalization,  proposed  by  [Bruner  13]  and  [Schön  83],  which  was  achieved  by 
incorporating sketches which students had to elaborate and share; this gave students 

1376

Zurita G., Baloian N., Pino J.A., Boghosian M.: Introducing ...

the  opportunity  to  know  new  perspectives,  thus  promoting  creativity.  During  the 
activity sketches were used to explain ideas, being a central element for discussion. 

Although there are sketching tools already in the market or developed for certain 
research  projects,  as  seen  in  section  3,  there  are  features  that  sketchpad  supports 
which are not implemented by other tools. These are those which enable a student to 
leave a group and join another, while keeping a personal copy of the workspace of the 
first group. This was easy the rotation of the students among groups. It is important 
that this process proceed swiftly without taking too much time or having to perform 
complicated steps, in order not to disturb the normal flow of the activity. 

Results  obtained  about  collaboration  during  the  activity  let  us  believe  that  the 
proposed tool, Sketchpad, can be successfully used to support pedagogical activities 
in  classrooms  that  promote  creativity  skills.  The  difference  between  the  results 
obtained with participants who worked with rotations and without them let us think 
that  Sketchpad  could  be  most  effective  when  used  for  supporting  collaborative 
activities, as well as in activities requiring a tool for sharing ideas.  

Other  students  who  worked  in  both  types  of  group,  with  and  without  rotation, 
mentioned collaboration as the factor which Sketchpad supports most, which indicates 
this  is  perhaps  the  most  relevant  factor  of  the  tool.  Although  the  expressiveness 
(externalization)  was  the  third  one  selected  by  the  students  as  the  most  important 
factor, it was the one with the best evaluation. This let us consider that Sketchpad is 
successful  for  supporting  an  activity  based  on  collaboration  and  externalization  for 
promoting creativity through brainsketching. 

We could find some evidence supporting the hypotheses stated at the beginning 
of  this  paper  regarding  the  differences  in  the  perceived  collaboration  between  the 
control  and  experimental  groups  and  the  contribution  of  Sketchpad  to  the 
collaboration during the activity. The positive results for the collaboration dimension 
mean  that  the  proposed  activity  does  promote  the  interaction  necessary  for 
collaborative learning and developing collaboration skills. Although we cannot assure 
that it will produce collaborative learning, we can say that it provides students with 
the  necessary  environment  for  this  kind  of  learning.  The  predominantly  positive 
results regarding the students’ perception of the tool’s ability to support collaboration 
confirm the ideas previously expressed. The use of sketches has also shown to be a 
good  vehicle  to  express  ideas  and  approach  a  solution  to  the  problem  including 
various points of view. Therefore, we think that despite the technical problems of the 
tool (which have been mostly solved in a new version already developed) we consider 
the  activity  successful  for  both,  the  control  and  experimental  groups.  Negative 
comments from the students  mostly addressed technical problems  with the tool and 
the positive ones were related to the activity itself and the contribution of the tool. 

Several activities are envisioned as future  work concerning this project. One of 
them is to  make experiments  with various types of problems to be presented to the 
students to check if they make any difference in the results. A second activity is to get 
external  assessment  of  experts  concerning  creativity,  according  to  the  criteria 
presented in Section 1. 

Zurita G., Baloian N., Pino J.A., Boghosian M.: Introducing ...

1377

References 

[AACSB 13] AACSB: Standard 9. “Curriculum content is appropriate to general expectations 
for the degree program type and learning goals”; (2013) [cited 20-04-2015]; Available from: 
http://www.aacsb.edu/accreditation/standards/2013-business/learning-and-
teaching/standard9.aspx 
[AACSB 15] AACSB: “Teaching Design for Creativity and Innovation”; (2015) [cited 2015 
20-04-2015]; Available from:  
http://www.aacsb.edu/en/events/Seminars/curriculum-development-series/design-thinking.aspx 
[Alvarez 13] Alvarez, C., Salavati, S., Nussbaum, M. Milrad, M.: “Collboard: Fostering new 
media  literacies  in  the  classroom  through  collaborative  problem  solving  supported by  digital 
pens and interactive whiteboards”; Computers & Education, 63 (2013), 368-379. 
[Amabile 96] Amabile, T.: “Creativity in context”; Westview Press (1996) 
[Antunes  13]  Antunes,  P.,  Simoes,  D.,  Carrico,  L,  Pino,  J.  A.:  “An  end-user  approach  to 
business  process  modeling”;  Journal  of  Network  and  Computer  Applications,  36,  6  (2013), 
1466-1479. 
[Aylesworth  08]  Aylesworth,  A.:  “Improving  case  discussion  with  an  improv  mind-set”; 
Journal of Marketing Education, 30, 2 (2008), 106-115. 
[Baloian  13]  Baloian,  N.,  Gutierrez,  F.,  and  Zurita,  G.:  “An  architecture  for  developing 
distributed collaborative applications using HTML5”; IEEE 17th International Conference on 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work in Design (CSCWD), IEEE (2013), 213-220. 
[Beavers 04] Beavers, J., Chou, T., Hinrichs, R., Moffatt, C., Pahud, M.,and Eaton, J. V.: “The 
learning  experience  project:  Enabling  collaborative  learning  with  ConferenceXP”;  Microsoft 
Research Technical Report MSR-TR-2004-42, April 2004.  
[Bruner 96] Bruner, J.S.: “The culture of education”; H.U. Press (1996) 
[Carroll 09] Carroll, E.A., Latulipe, C., Fung, R., and Terry, M.: “Creativity factor evaluation: 
Towards  a  Standardized  survey  metric  for  creativity  support”;  7th  ACM  conference  on 
Creativity and cognition, Berkeley, California, USA, October 26-30, (2009), 127-136. 
[Chang 09] Chang, C. C.: “Using Jigsaw Collaborative Learning Strategy in online discussion 
to foster a project-based learning community on the web”; International Journal of Instructional 
Media, 36, 2 (2009), 221-234. 
[Creswell  09]  Creswell,  J.W.:  “Research  design.  Qualitative,  quantitative  and  mixed  method 
approaches”; Sage Publications (2009) 
[Csikszentmihalyi 96] Csikszentmihalyi, M.: “Creativity: flow and the psychology of discovery 
and invention”; HarperCollins Pub., 1st Ed. (1996) 
[De Bobo 90] De Bobo, E.: “Lateral Thinking: a textbook for Creativity”; Penguin Books Pub., 
2nd Ed. (1990) 
[Fairbank  01]  Fairbank,  J.  F.,  &  Williams,  S.  D.:  “Motivating  creativity  and  enhancing 
innovation  through  employee  suggestion  system  technology”; Creativity  and  Innovation 
Management, 10, 2 (2001), 68-74. 
[Fischer 04] Fischer, G.: “Social creativity: turning barriers into opportunities for collaborative 
design”;  Proceedings  of  the  eighth  conference  on  Participatory  design:  Artful  integration: 
interweaving media, materials and practices, ACM Press, New York (2004), 152-162. 

1378

Zurita G., Baloian N., Pino J.A., Boghosian M.: Introducing ...

[Fons  2010]  Fons,  John:  “A  year  without  paper:  Tablet  computers  in  the  classroom”;  The 
Physics Teacher, 48, 7 (2010), 481-483.  
[Frez 12] Frez,  J.,  Baloian,  N.  and Zurita,  G.:  “Software  Platform  to  build  geo-collaborative 
Systems  supporting  design  and planning”;  IEEE  16th  International  Conference  on  Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work in Design (CSCWD. IEEE Press (2012), 350-357. 
[Griffin 11] Griffin, P., McGaw, B., and Care, E.: “Assessment and Teaching of 21st Century 
Skills”; Springer, Dordrecht (2011). 
[Gryskiewics 87] Gryskiewics, S. S.: “Predictable creativity”; in S. G. Isaksen (Ed.): “Frontiers 
of creativity research: Beyond the basics”; Bearly, Buffalo, NY (1987), 305-313. 
[Guerrero  03]  Guerrero,  L.,  Mejias,  B.,  Collazos,  C.,  Pino,  J.  A.,  Ochoa,  S.:  “Collaborative 
learning and creative writing”; First Latin American Web Congress, IEEE (2003), 180-186.. 
[Guzdial 01] Guzdial, M., Rick, J., and Kehoe, C.: “Beyond adoption to invention: Teachercreated 
collaborative activities in higher education”; J. of the Learning Sc., 10, 3 (2001), 265279.
 
[Harvard 15] Harvard Business Review: “Harvard Business Review Search: Creativity” (2015) 
[cited 22-04-2015]; Available from: https://hbr.org/search?term=creativity  
[Harvard 99] Amabile, T. et al.: “Harvard Business Review on Breakthrough Thinking”; HBS 
Press (1999) 
[Hennessy  11]  Hennessy,  S.:  “The  role  of  digital  artefacts  on  the  interactive  whiteboard  in 
supporting  classroom  dialogue”;  Journal  of  Computer  Assisted  Learning,  27,  6  (2011),  463489.
 
[Isaksen  11]  Isaksen,  S.  G.,  Dorval,  K.  B.,  and  Treffinger,  D.  J.:  “Creativity,  Approaches  to 
Problem SolvingA 
Framework for Innovation and Change”; Sage Pub., 3rd Ed. (2011) 
[Isaksen  84]  Isaksen,  S.  G.:  “Organizational  and  industrial  innovation:  Using  critical  and 
creative thinking”; Paper presented at the Conference on Critical Thinking: An Interdisciplinary 
Appraisal, sponsored by Kingsborough Community College, NY (1984). 
[Isaksen  85]  Isaksen,  S.  G.  and  Treffinger,  D.  J.:  “Creative  Problem  Solving;  The  Basic 
Course”; Bearly Ltd. Pub. (1985) 
[Jonassen 98] Jonassen, D. H., Pfeiffer, W. S.,, & Wilson, B. G.: ”Learning with technology: A 
constructivist perspective”; Prentice Hall (1998) 
[Lane  10]  Lane,  D.,  Seery,  N.,  and  Gordon,  S.:  “Promoting  Creative  Discovery  and  Mental 
Synthesis  through  Freehand  Sketching”;  in  “Visualizing  Change:  Graphics  on  the  Horizon”; 
ASEE  Engineering  Design  Graphics  Division  65th  Mid-Year  Conference  (October  2010), 
Houghton, Michigan (2010). 
[Linsey  11]  Linsey,  J.S.,  E.F.  Clauss,  E.  F.,  Kurtoglu,  T.,  Murphy,  J.  T.,  Wood,  K.  L., 
Markman, A. B.: “An experimental study of group idea generation techniques: understanding 
the roles of idea representation and viewing methods”; Journal of Mechanical Design, 133, 3 
(2011), 1-15. 
[Mamykaya  2002]  Mamykina,  L.,  Candy,  L.,  &  Edmonds,  E.:  “Collaborative  creativity”; 
Communications of the ACM, 45, 10 (2002), 96-99. 
[Mihai 12] Mihai-Yiannaki, S., & Savvides, S.: “Creativity in business schools-post financial 
crisis implications”; International Journal of Organizational Analysis, 20, 2 (2012), 187-202. 

Zurita G., Baloian N., Pino J.A., Boghosian M.: Introducing ...

1379

[Niemi 14] Niemi, H., Harju, V., Vivitsou, M., Viitanen, K., Multisilta, J., & Kuokkanen, A.: 
“Digital  Storytelling  for  21st  -Century  Skills  in  Virtual  Learning  Environments”;  Creative 
Education, 5 (2014), 657-671. 
[Noller 79] Noller R. B.: “Scratching the surface of creative problem solving: A bird’s eye view 
of CPS”; DOK, Buffalo, NY (1979) 
[O'Donnell  13]  O'Donnell,  A.  M.,  Hmelo-Silver,  C.  E.,  &  Erkens,  G.  (Eds.).  “Collaborative 
learning, reasoning, and technology”; Routledge (2013) 
[Pickens 80] Pickens, J.: “Brainsketching”; Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma (1980) 
[Rotherham  09]  Rotherham,  A.J.  and  Willingham,  D.:  “21st  Century  skills:  The  challenges 
ahead”; Educational Leadership, 67, 1 (2009), 16-21. 
[Rhodes 61] Rhodes, M.: “An analysis of creativity”; Phi Delta Kappan, 42 (1961), 205-310. 
[Sawyer 11] Sawyer, R. K.: “Explaining creativity: The science of human innovation”; Oxford 
University Press (2011) 
[Schlee 14] Schlee, R.P. and Harich, K. R.: “Teaching Creativity to Business Students: How 
Well Are We Doing?”; Journal of Education for Business, 89, 3 (2014), 133-141. 
[Schön 83] Schön, D.A.: “The reflective practitioner: How professionals think in action”; vol. 
5126, Basic Books (1983) 
[Seeling 12] Seeling, T. L.: “inGeniusA 
Crash Course on Creativity”; HarperCollins Pub., 1st 
Ed. (2012) 
[Shah 01] Shah, J.J., Vargas-Hernandez, N.O.E., Summers, J.D., Kulkarni, S.: “Collaborative 
sketching (C-sketch): an idea generation technique for engineering design”; J. Creative Behav., 
35, 3 (2001), 168-198. 
[Titus  07]  Titus,  P.A.:  “Applied  creativity:  The  creative  marketing  breakthrough  model”; 
Journal of Marketing Education, 29, 3 (2007), 262-272. 
[Van der Lugt 02] Van der Lugt, R.: “Brainsketching and how it differs from brainstorming”; 
Creativity and Innovation Management, 11, 1 (2002), 43-54. 
[Van Joolingen 05] van Joolingen, W. de Jong T., Lazonder, A. Savelsbergh, E. Manlove S.: 
“Co-Lab:  research  and  development  of  an  online  learning  environment  for  collaborative 
scientific discovery learning”; Computers in human behavior, 21, 4 (2005), 671-688. 
[Weisberg 93] Weisberg, R. W.: “Creativity: beyond the myth of genius”; W. H. Freeman & 
Co., NY (1993). 
[Yar 08] Yar Hamidi, D., Wennberg, K., & Berglund, H. (2008). Creativity in entrepreneurship 
education. Journal of Small Business and Enterprise Development, 15(2), 304-320. 
[Zurita  05]  Zurita,  G.,  Nussbaum,  M.,  &  Salinas,  R.:  “Dynamic  grouping  in  collaborative 
learning  supported  by  wireless  handhelds”;  Educational  Technology  &  Society,  8,  3  (2005), 
149-161. 
[Zurita  08]  Zurita,  G.,  Baloian,  N.,  and  Baytelman,  F.:  “A  collaborative  face-to-face  design 
support system based on sketching and gesturing”; Advanced Engineering Informatics, 22, 3 
(2008), 340-349. 
[Zurita 15] Zurita, G., Cárdenas, C., & Baloian, N.: “Sketchpad: A Learning Tool Supporting 
Creativity  in  Collaborative  Learning  Activities”,  CYTED-RITOS  International  Workshop  on 
Groupware 2015, Springer (2015), 198-209. 

