Journal of Universal Computer Science, vol. 17, no. 2 (2011), 164-182
submitted: 17/9/09, accepted: 7/12/10, appeared: 28/1/11 © J.UCS

Developing a Mobile Collaborative Tool for Business 

Continuity Management 

Claudio Sapateiro 

(Polytechnic Institute of Setúbal, Setúbal, Portugal 

claudio.sapateiro@estsetubal.ips.pt) 

(Department of Computer Science, University of Chile, Santiago de Chile, Chile 

Nelson Baloian 

nbaloian@dcc.uchile.cl) 

(Faculty of Sciences of the University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal 

 

 
 

 

 

 

Pedro Antunes 

paa@di.fc.ul.pt) 

Gustavo Zurita 

Chile 

gnzurita@fen.uchile.cl) 

(Management and Information Systems Department, University of Chile, Santiago de Chile 

 
 
 
Abstract:  We  describe  the  design  of  a  mobile  collaborative  tool  that  helps  teams  managing 
critical  computing  infrastructures  in organizations,  a  task  that  is usually  designated  Business 
Continuity Management. The design process started with a requirements definition phase based 
on interviews with professional teams. The elicited requirements highlight four main concerns: 
collaboration  support,  knowledge  management,  team  performance,  and  situation  awareness. 
Based  on  these  concerns,  we  developed  a  data  model  and  tool  supporting  the  collaborative 
update of Situation Matrixes. The matrixes aim to provide an integrated view of the operational 
and  contextual  conditions  that  frame  critical  events  and  inform  the  operators’  responses  to 
events. The paper provides results from our preliminary experiments with Situation Matrixes.  
 
Keywords: Business Continuity Management, Collaboration Support, Situation Awareness 
Category: H.1.2 

1   Introduction 

This  paper  investigates  a  specific  application  area  designated  Business  Continuity 
Management (BCM). The aim of BCM is preventing, mitigating and containing the 
occurrence of major disruptions in the operations of Information Technology (IT) in 
large organizations. BCM has received  significant attention since the occurrence of 
catastrophic business breakdowns in the United States of America derived from the 
terrorist attacks on the Twin Towers and hurricane Katrina [Hiles, 2008].  

The main goal of our research is exploring the possibilities of mobile collaboration 
support  of  BCM.  We  developed  a  mobile  collaborative  tool  supporting  BCM  and 
have been testing it in two organizations. This paper describes the adopted research 
approach  and  discusses  the  outcomes  obtained  so  far.  We  highlight  the  main 

 

Sapateiro C., Baloian N., Antunes P., Zurita G.: Developing a Mobile ...

165

requirements obtained from the practitioners, describe the developed data model, and 
discuss the feedback obtained from the organizations where the tool has been used.  

The paper is organized as follows. In the next section we draw some considerations 
about mobile collaboration support. Section 3 discusses the application scenario. The 
tool  design  is  presented  in  Section  4,  while  Section  5  focuses  on  implementation 
details.  The  feedback  obtained  from  the  practitioners  is  presented  in  Section  6. 
Section  7  discusses  our  findings.  And  finally  Section  8  presents  some  concluding 
remarks and points towards future work directions.  

2   Mobile Collaboration 

fostered  by  advances 

in  collaboration  support  have  been 

Innovations 
in 
communications  networks  and  distributed  systems  encouraging  the  adoption  of 
synchronous  data  distribution,  remote  invocation  of  services,  shared  information 
management, task coordination, and group management [Litu, 2004, Lukosch, 2002, 
Mascolo,  2002].  Mobile  collaboration  concerns  people  working  together  while 
moving across space [Antunes, 2008]. It combines the well-known characteristics of 
mobile  systems,  such  as  autonomy,  mobility,  pervasiveness,  small  form  factor  and 
unobtrusiveness  with  the  characteristics  associated  with  collaborative  systems.  One 
good  example  of  mobile  collaboration  is  supporting  access  to  patient  records  in 
hospitals  [Muñoz,  2003],  which  are  often  very  large  working  spaces  with  highly 
variable  work demands and  where the  healthcare personnel  must be  highly  mobile, 
flexible and responsive.  

The simultaneous support to mobility and collaboration presents several challenges. 
One  such  challenge  is  that  mobility  is  high  demanding  of  distributed/collaborative 
services, since the work context may be subject to constant changes, requiring more 
flexible data/task management than usually offered by desktop collaborative settings.  
Mobile  systems  also  depend  on  wireless  networks  to  exchange  and  synchronize 
data. But wireless networks generally exhibit high packet loss rates, low bandwidth 
and  high  latency  [Buszko,  2001].  These  inherent  characteristics  have  significant 
impact on the application level, especially if applications are not explicitly designed 
to support unpredictable operating conditions.  

Another  challenge  concerns  increasing  coupling  between  users  [Pautasso,  2009]. 
Coupling  is  a  metaphorical  concept  regarding  the  degree  that  group  members  feel 
connected to each other [Van de Ven, 1976]. Tight coupling is necessary to support 
most  difficult  tasks  (having  high  task  uncertainty)  requiring  mutual  adjustment  of 
tasks  and  goals.  But  designing  applications  for  tight  coupling  requires  supporting 
immediate feedback about what everybody is doing in the workspace, which may be 
hard to develop.  

At the cognitive level, the attention required by mobile collaboration is also more 
demanding:  mobile  collaboration  typically  requires  divided  attention  [Roda,  2006], 
where users switch the focus of attention between their own work, the work of others 
and  the  events  occurring  in  the  environment,  a  context  that  is  quite  distinct  from 
doing individual work in front of a desktop computer.  

Mobile  collaboration  also  associates  information  management  with  the  physical, 
virtual  and  social  environments  [MacEachren,  2003],  demanding  rich  situation 

 

166

Sapateiro C., Baloian N., Antunes P., Zurita G.: Developing a Mobile ...

awareness necessary to accomplish difficult tasks such as crisis management [Capata, 
2008, Schafer, 2007] and strategy making [MacEachren, 2005].  

Most  mobile  devices  are  equipped  with  small  displays.  Although  the  currently 
available  interaction  methods  are  varied,  including  keyboard,  pen-based,  gesturing 
and voice control, their adoption requires careful design decisions not only regarding 
display  size  but  also  non-stationary  control  of  input  devices  [Guerrero,  2006]. 
Research done in this area stresses the importance of designing simple user-interfaces 
[Schafer, 2007].  

In this paper we focus on the challenges discussed above. In particular, we explore 
the  design  of  a  distributed/collaborative  information  management  component 
supporting  flexible  group  operations  in  BCM,  addressing  issues  such  as  tight 
coupling,  situation  awareness  and  adoption  of  gestures  as  the  main  user-interface 
mechanism.  

3   Application Scenario and Requirements 

We now describe the application scenario embraced by our research. The discussion 
primarily  serves  to  characterize  the  main  requirements  associated  with  mobile 
collaboration in BCM. The selected scenario considers the support of BCM activities 
by  organizational  units  responsible  for  maintaining  the  operations  of  infrastructures 
composed by office networks, networking devices, servers and desktop computers. A 
large  amount  of  work  accomplished  by  these  units  concerns  highly  standardized 
activities, such as reconfiguring routers, updating virus-scanning utilities, monitoring 
service levels and responding to users’ requests.  

Our  focus  is  not  on  such  standardized  activities  but  instead  on  the  non-routine 
activities  that  do  not  occur  very  often  but  have  potential  to  disrupt  the  business 
operations (low probability, high impact). These are the activities under the scope of 
BCM.  A  large  number  of  disruptive  situations  are  perceived  as  critical  to  the 
organizations that heavily rely on IT infrastructures, including major server failures, 
critical  service  failures  and  large-scale  networking  failures,  not  forgetting  major 
catastrophic accidents such as fires, floods and earthquakes.  

Despite the existence of highly trained personnel and established continuity plans 
to address some disruptive situations, two  main  issues  may strongly condition their 
effectiveness.  First,  standard  procedures  typically  do  not  accommodate  the  whole 
variety  of  contingency  factors  that  may  occur.  Therefore,  plans  serve  more  as 
information resources than actual operational procedures [Suchman, 1987]. They may 
be  one  important  asset  but  are  not  as  critical  as  other  assets,  in  particular  highly 
knowledgeable people. Second, many disruptive situations require bringing together 
tacit knowledge from multiple participants who, as a group, may be more capable to 
assess the situation and develop a creative solution or temporary workaround.  

The  role  that  a  mobile  collaboration  tool  plays  in  this  scenario  is  increasing  the 
teams’ capability to assess, make decisions and act upon disruptive situations through 
better  communication,  data  sharing  and  coordination.  To  fully  understand  this 
scenario,  we  conducted  a  set  of  semi-structured  interviews  with  two  BCM  teams 
operating in two different organizations.  

We  inquired  about  the  types  of  disruptive  situations  that  emerge  in  the  target 
organizations  as  well  as  the  practices  developed  by  the  BCM  teams  to  overcome 

 

Sapateiro C., Baloian N., Antunes P., Zurita G.: Developing a Mobile ...

167

them. One coordinator, two senior technicians and two junior technicians constituted 
the  first  BCM  team  we  studied.  The  second  BCM  team  consisted  of  one  team 
coordinator, one senior technician and one junior technician.  

The  outcomes  from  the  semi-structured  interviews  indicate  that  the  most  critical 
disruptive situations are related with server failures, mostly due to disk failures, and 
connectivity  losses  in  specific  network  segments  compromising  a  wide  variety  of 
services. As pointed out by the teams, the existing preventive practices rely heavily 
on  monitoring  active  network  elements  through  control  panels,  and  having  alerts 
displayed and emailed to the team members.  

Many disruptive situations require that the team members find out where the failing 
components  or  services  are  physically  located  and  go  there  to  perceive  the  actual 
situation  context.  The  diagnosis  and  recovery  practices  rely  a  lot  on  the  field 
experience of each team member, which seems to be highly specialized, e.g. there are 
Windows  and  LINUX  specialists.  The  BCM  teams  also  depend  on  quick  informal 
meetings,  phone  calls  and  chat-tools  to  share  knowledge,  make  decisions  and 
organize activities.  

One key concern that emerged from the semi-structured interviews is that the teams 
find  it  important  to  document  what  has  been  done  to  diagnose  and  recover  from 
disruptive  situations.  That 
to  build 
organizational memory, especially because people tend to rotate a lot in these units 
and past experience is often lost.  

information  was  considered  essential 

Although both teams use Trouble Ticket software in their routine operations, they 
also realized that Trouble Tickets are almost irrelevant during non-routine situations. 
Trouble Tickets are sometimes used for incident opening  and only occasionally  for 
post  mortem  annotations  to  close  incidents,  with  no  significant  impact  on  planning 
future reactions.  

From  these  interviews  we  realized  that:  (1)  the  selected  application  scenario 
concerns a mobile collaborative situation perceived as critical to BCM teams; and (2) 
the BCM tasks perceived as important by the teams are related with decision making 
and organizational memory.  

Having established the relevance of the selected application scenario, we proceed 
with a more thorough analysis of the requirements. We adopted the following method. 
First,  we  compiled  a  list  of  requirements  from  the  related  literature.  Then  we 
requested the participating team members to analyze and prioritize the requirements 
according with their work context. And we finally established the list of requirements 
according with the perceived priorities.  

The initial list of requirements compiled from the related literature focused on four 
main  categories:  collaborative  technology  [Steves,  2001],  knowledge  management 
[Vizcaíno,  2005],  team  performance  [Baeza-Yates,  2006]  and  situation  awareness 
[Salmon,  2005].  The  first  category  addresses  the  main  technological  features 
necessary to design collaboration support. The knowledge-management category was 
selected  because  it  has  already  been  pointed  out  as  important  by  the  BCM  teams. 
Team  performance  concerns  the  efficiency  of  BCM  tools.  And  the  situation 
awareness  category  was  selected  to  address  the  diagnosis  and  decision  making 
activities  associated  with  BCM  [Endsley,  2003].  In  Table  1  we  present  the 
requirements list that was presented to the participants for prioritization.  

 

 

168

 

Sapateiro C., Baloian N., Antunes P., Zurita G.: Developing a Mobile ...

Transition between individual and team work  
Facilitate situation monitoring 

#  Requirement 
1  Communication support through shared artifacts  
2 
3 
4  Minimum overhead  
5  Mobility support 
6  Help understanding situation context  
7  Help perceiving who is involved 
8  Assist situation size up  
9  Assist overall situation representation 
10  Knowledge externalization  
11  Knowledge transfer  
12  Document incident handling  
13 
14 
15 

Improve diagnosis time 
Improve recovery time 
Increase number of incidents simultaneously attended 

Table 1: Requirements list 

Influence Area 

Collaboration 
support  

Situation 
awareness 

Knowledge 
management 

Performance 

The  participants  (7  persons)  were  requested  to  individually  rate  the  selected 
requirements according  with  relevance to their  work context. The ratings  scale  was 
from  1  to  4,  in  which:  1  –  Not  perceived  as  important;  2  –  Less  important;  3  – 
Important; and 4 – Very important. The obtained scores are shown in Table 2.  

We defined a threshold of 3.0 for cutting off the less important requirements. As 
shown  in  Table  2,  eight  requirements  were  rated  above  the  threshold  (important  or 
very important) and seven requirements were rated below the threshold (less or not 
important). Interestingly, the four categories are all evenly represented, although we 
find a slight advantage given to collaboration support and situation awareness.  

The  obtained  results  emphasize  the  importance  given  to  immediacy  of  action 
(requirements 1, 4 and 13) and responsiveness to events (requirements 3, 5, 6, 8 and 
13). In our view, these results express the importance of tight coupling in BCM and 
actually elucidate how it may be obtained.  

Incident  documentation  (requirement  12)  was  already  mentioned  in  the  semistructured 
interviews and emerges again as an important requirement. It should also 
be  emphasized  that  mobility,  which  is  at  the  core  of  our  research,  was  the  second 
most  rated  requirement.  Overall,  with  this  inquiry  we  could  better  understand  how 
BCM is transformed into more operational objectives.  

 
 

 

 

# 
4 
5 
6 
13 
12 
8 
3 
10 
11 
15 
1 
9 
14 
7 
2 

Sapateiro C., Baloian N., Antunes P., Zurita G.: Developing a Mobile ...

169

1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
2 
3 
 
2 
2 
2 
4 
5 

3 
1 
2 
2 
2 
2 
5 
6 
4 
2 
5 
5 
5 
5 
3 
2 

4 
6 
5 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
1 
2 
1 
 
 
 
 
 

AVG 
3.86 
3.71 
3.71 
3.67 
3.33 
3.29 
3.14 
2.86 
2.86 
2.86 
2.71 
2.71 
2.71 
2.43 
2.29 

STDEV 

0.38 
0.49 
0.49 
0.52 
0.82 
0.49 
0.38 
0.69 
0.90 
0.90 
0.49 
0.49 
0.49 
0.53 
0.49 

Table 2: Requirements priorities 

4   The BCM Tool 

Let  us recall  the  main design requirements obtained  from  our analysis of the BCM 
domain. The research indicated as most important: (1) Minimum overhead to operate 
technology;  (2)  Supporting  mobility;  (3)  Building  situation  context;  (4)  Improving 
diagnosis  time;  (5)  Documenting  actions;  (6)  Assisting  situation  diagnosis;  and  (7) 
Facilitating situation monitoring.  

We  note  that  requirements  3,  6  and  7  contribute  to  the  same  generic  goal: 
increasing the capacity to understand the situation as the associated context evolves, 
following an information seeking, processing and monitoring cycle. Our response to 
this goal will be explained in Section 4.1, where we describe the situation awareness 
model  developed  to  consistently  manage  the  business  continuity  data  elements. 
Actually,  the  requirement  5  is  also  a  driver  of  the  situation  awareness  model, 
assuming  the  capability  to  preserve  the  situation  awareness  data  elements  in  a 
repository for later reference (e.g., during critical analysis and training).  

In  our  view,  addressing  requirement  4  in  complex  work  situations  requires 
collaboration and tight coupling, so that the various persons involved may contribute 
with  their  experience  to  build  situation  awareness  and  define  adequate  and  timely 
responses.  We  will  address  this  requirement  in  Section  4.2.  And  finally,  the 
requirements  1  and  2  are  fundamentally  related  with  support  for  pen-based 
interactions described in Section 4.3.  
 

 

170

Sapateiro C., Baloian N., Antunes P., Zurita G.: Developing a Mobile ...

4.1 Situation awareness model 
One  conceptual  model  that  helps  understanding  BCM  is  the  Swiss-Cheese  Model 
[Reason,  2008].  This  model  characterizes  disruptive  situations  as  a  trajectory  of 
events  through  “gaps”  in  a  succession  of  defensive  layers  consisting  of  physical 
protections, engineered safety features, administrative controls, protective devices and 
frontline  operators.  Understanding  the  trajectory  of  events  and  its  relationship  with 
defensive layers is fundamental to understand how a disruptive situation enfolds.  

According with this view, BCM may be regarded as the proactive monitoring and 
management  of  defensive  layers  so  that  the  gaps  never  align  and  therefore  the 
trajectory of events is kept under control (both preventively and reactively).  

We  adopted  this  conceptual  view  to  systematize  the  teams’  information  needs 
when  tackling  disruptive  situations.  Furthermore,  by  extending  the  Swiss-Cheese 
Model  to  BCM  we  are  adopting  a  phenomenological  perspective  where  each 
defensive  layer  has  a  corresponding  context  consisting  of  relational  entities 
associating events with levels of understanding, objects and actions [Borges, 2005].  

The  advantages  from  integrating  the  notions  of  defensive  layer  and  context  are 
twofold. On the one hand, we are associating contexts to the dynamics of the situation 
in accordance with the time dimension. On the other hand, it also serves to structure 
the contextual information using a simple data visualization scheme.  

Let us further characterize the proposed situation awareness model. We start with 
context. In our model, Situation Dimensions (SD) materialize context as a collection 
of various types of elements that brought together provide insights about a particular 
situation.  Events,  actors,  goals,  actions,  tools  and  procedures  are  all  examples  of 
relevant SD.  

But context necessarily must bring together these SD in meaningful and purposeful 
ways. Situation Matrixes (SM) accomplish this goal by relating SD pairs. An example 
would be an Actors/Actions SM defining who may do what. Figure 1 illustrates how 
several SM may be brought together to characterize a disruptive situation this way.  

Other purposeful examples of SM are Events/Goals, Goals/Actions and Resources 
/Actors,  which  are  typically  adopted  in  emergency  planning  and  management 
scenarios (Figure 2). Since several SM may be necessary to express the context of a 
disruptive situation, we may define Situation Context (SC) as a collection of several 
related SM.  

Adopting  the  idea  brought  by  the  Swiss-Cheese  Model  that  multiple  defensive 
layers are necessary to understand a disruptive situation, we define the SC tree as a 
collection of related SC. The SC tree is adequate to model the trajectory of disruptive 
situations  according  with  time  (using  parent-child  relationships  to  model  chains  of 
events),  model  different  perceptions  of  the  situation  (where  the  parent-child 
relationships  serve  to  represent  different  perceptions),  and  also  to  model  the 
projection of events (where leaves model possible future alternatives).  

Concerning the various correlations in a SM, they may be expressed using different 
symbols,  colors  and  sizes  (see  Figure  2).  Domain  experts  must  define  the  precise 
semantic meaning of the correlations. By using pre-defined symbols, the correlations 
may indicate how resources are allocated to specific actors, how actors and resources 
are associated with specific locations, and how actions are assigned to specific actors 
and goals, just to mention some few examples.  

 

 

 

Sapateiro C., Baloian N., Antunes P., Zurita G.: Developing a Mobile ...

171

Figure 1: Situation awareness model 

 

Figure 2: Examples of Situation Matrixes 

 

4.2 Collaboration model 
The  collaboration  model  complements  the  situation  awareness  model  with  rules 
specifying  how  teams  interact  with  the  SC  tree.  The  adopted  model  supports  the 
dynamic creation of SM and SD, and concurrent updates on the SM using the Open 
Floor  paradigm.  This  paradigm,  well  known  by  the  CSCW  community,  does  not 
impose  any  role-based  or  time-based  restrictions  to  concurrent  data  changes, 

 

172

Sapateiro C., Baloian N., Antunes P., Zurita G.: Developing a Mobile ...

specifying  that  the  last  serialized  request  is  the  one  that  is  committed  [Reinhard, 
1994].  

Figure 3 illustrates how the SC tree mediates collaboration through concurrent data 
changes  on  the  SC  tree.  The  SC  tree  supports  planning,  situation  awareness  and 
response  activities.  Planning  is  accomplished  by  creating  SD  and  SM.  Situation 
awareness is maintained by constantly updating the SM. And responses are lead by 
continuously monitoring the SM.  
 

Figure 3: Collaboration model 

 

4.3 Pen-based interaction 
The developed tool supports collaborative creation and manipulation of SD and SM 
using pen-based gestures. This type of interaction is a good alternative to implement 
the human-machine interface in the selected application scenario, requiring minimum 
overhead and mobility.  

The developed interactive  mechanisms require  mastering a small number of penbased 
gestures. The “half rectangle” gesture shown in Figure 4.a is recognized by the 
tool as the creation of a new SM. The list of available SD is displayed when pointing 
towards  the  right  limit  of  the  display  (Figure  4.b).  The  selected  SD  may  then  be 
dragged to the SM (Figure 4.c). We remind that the SM are bi-dimensional.  

After assigning two SD to a SM, the users may start populating the SM with SD 
elements. One example is defining actions and goals for the Goals/Actions SM. This 
is accomplished by inserting lines and columns in the SM. To create a line or column, 
the  user  has  to  double  click  on  the  respective  label  (Figure  5.a  illustrates  how  a 
column  is  created).  After  this,  the  user  should  define  the  element  label.  Figure  5.b 
shows how the element labeled “Rodrigo” is associated with the Actors SD. Figure 
5.c shows that the user has already associated three elements to the Actors SD and is 
starting the association of elements to the Actions SD, defined in rows.  

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

Sapateiro C., Baloian N., Antunes P., Zurita G.: Developing a Mobile ...

173

Figure 4: Creating Situation Matrixes: a) SM Creation; b) Displaying SD; and c) 

Assigning SD to SM 

 

a) 

 

b) 

c) 

 

d) 

 

 

Figure 5: Populating Situation Matrixes: a) Creating SD elements; b) and c) 

Labeling SD elements; and d) Defining correlations in the SM 

To facilitate setting correlations between SD elements, the tool allows selecting a 
list of predefined values. We are currently using four correlations: (a) empty cell, no 
importance  given;  (b)  small  dot,  small  importance;  c)  medium  dot,  relative 
importance; and (d) big circle, high importance. The different correlations are shown 

 

174

Sapateiro C., Baloian N., Antunes P., Zurita G.: Developing a Mobile ...

in Figure 5.d. Clicking on a cell will cause a pop-up menu to be displayed with the 
available options.  

Since the users may be interested in viewing different parts of the SM, according 
with their context of action, the tool allows hiding rows or columns by clicking on the 
label of the row or column the user wants to hide. The hidden rows and columns are 
displayed with thick lines. To show again a hidden column or row, the user just has to 
double click on the thick line.  

Regarding the SM  navigation, the tool supports left-right  and up-down scrolling, 
combined with zoom-in and zoom-out. These interactions are illustrated in Figure 6. 
Note  that,  since  display  space  tends  to  be  scarce,  the  above  navigation  capabilities 
rely on gestures rather than typical visual elements such as scrollbars.  
 

a)

 

b) 

 

Figure 6: SM Navigation: a) Zoom-in and zoom-out; and b) left-right and up-down 

scrolling 

We  also  note  that  the  technology  we  have  been  using  is  capable  to  display  one 
single  SM;  and  with  limitations,  since  only  a  small  number  of  SD  elements  may 
effectively be displayed without scrolling. The developed interaction mechanism for 
navigating multiple SM relies on a menu.  

5   Implementation Details 

The  functionality  described  in  the  previous  section  was  implemented  on  top  of  an 
existing framework supporting the development of mobile collaborative applications 
[Baloian,  2009].  This  framework  was  especially  conceived  to  support  collaborative 
settings characterized by high mobility, frequent changes in users’ connectivity, and 
possible absence of structured communications networks.  

The  framework  supplies  two  application  development  modules  supporting  two 
fundamental  services:  (1)  group  and  information  management;  and  (2)  pen-based 
interaction support, including gesture recognition. These services are detailed below. 

 

Group  and  information  management.  This  service  encapsulates  functionality 
associated  with  networking,  communication,  group  management  and  data  sharing. 
The service also supports interoperability between two worlds: Java, which is often 

 

Sapateiro C., Baloian N., Antunes P., Zurita G.: Developing a Mobile ...

175

used  in  desktop  computing;  and  C#,  frequently  used  to  program  applications  for 
mobile devices. It also implements mechanisms for converting data objects from their 
internal representations into XML, transmitting them across platforms and converting 
XML back into the corresponding internal representations. This feature has been used 
to develop the tool described in this paper in different  mobile devices. Considering 
the functionality described in the previous section, the tool implements the following 
shared data elements: SM tree, SD, SD elements and correlations.  

The  framework  also  manages  user  groups.  Various  groups  may  be  defined  to 
manage synchronous and asynchronous modes, the later allowing sharing information 
at certain moments.  

Regarding  networking,  the  adopted  communications  infrastructure  is  based  on 
mobile ad-hoc networks (MANET), adequate for mobile scenarios where structured 
networks may not be available. This means the tool adopts a peer-to-peer architecture, 
avoiding  a  central  server  with  a  “master”  copy  of  the  data  and  a  list  of  active  and 
inactive users. Instead, the peer-to-peer architecture is completely decentralized and 
transmits information to the peers that may be active in a particular moment with no 
consideration for joins and leaves.  

To join the ad-hoc network, the tool just instantiates a shared object. Data sharing 
is  implemented  by  sending  multicast  messages  at  regular  intervals  to  the  available 
peers.  The  presence  of  peers  in  the  network  is  detected  by  receiving  messages  at 
regular intervals.  

The data sharing mechanism is also based on the “shared object” metaphor, using 
an abstract class that should be extended to create an object class whose state will be 
transmitted  to  all  active  peers  whenever  changed,  independently  of  which  specific 
instance has changed. Every data element present in the SC tree is an extension of a 
shared  class.  Apart  from  declaring  the  field  variables  and  methods  for  the  shared 
classes, the developers also have to implement postProcess methods, which are called 
every  time  an  object  state  is  updated  by  a  remote  instance.  Overall,  from  an 
information management point of view, we may say that the tool is just built on top of 
shared objects and group objects.  
 
Pen-based  interaction  support.  As  we  previously  mentioned,  the  framework  also 
implements  pen-based  interactions.  A  good  pen-based  interface  should  make 
extensive  use  of  gestures.  The  framework  offers  a  library  of  classes  capable  to 
recognize  various  types  of  gestures.  Certain  gestures  allow  users  to  select,  copy, 
paste, resize, zoom and rotate text and sketches. More details about this library may 
be  found  in  [Baloian,  2009].  Special  concern  has  been  done  to  support  pen-based 
interactions in reduced displays, as it is often the case of mobile devices. Sketching 
and  writing  may  be  done  on  a  big  scale  and  then  be  automatically  scaled  down  to 
occupy a small portion of the available display.  

6   Evaluation 

The  evaluation  of  collaborative  technologies  raises  many  methodological  concerns 
that  have  received  attention  from  researchers  in  the  CSCW  community  [Antunes, 
forthcoming].  Evaluation  strategies  may  differ  in:  moment  (design,  prototype, 

 

176

Sapateiro C., Baloian N., Antunes P., Zurita G.: Developing a Mobile ...

finished  product),  time  span  (hours,  weeks,  months,  years),  place (laboratory,  work 
context), type of people involved (domain experts, final users, developers) and type of 
research questions (quantitative, qualitative) [Herskovic, 2007]. Also, the scope of the 
evaluation  may  target  different  dimensions  of  analysis,  from  technical  (e.g., 
interoperability)  to  organizational  (e.g.,  effects  on  task  performance)  [Gauducheau, 
2005, Vyhmeister, 2006].  

One  typical  evaluation  strategy  uses  field  methods  in  actual  work  contexts 
[Hughes, 1994]. Although this approach allows capturing more realistic problems and 
requirements, it  may also be difficult  to settle  for several  reasons: time investment, 
scenario setting, prototype maturity, etc.  

Another alternative is using inspection techniques [Nielsen, 1994]. The inspection 
techniques  are  less  costly  than  field  methods  and  may  be  used  earlier  and  more 
frequently  in  the  development  cycle.  Steves  et  al  [2001]  defend  that  inspection 
techniques should be employed in early development stages, when prototypes are still 
immature,  and  field  methods  should  be  employed  afterwards.  Based  on  this 
perspective, our evaluation method adopts the inspection technique.  

The evaluation process evolved in the following way. First, we requested the BCM 
team  coordinators  participating  in  our  experiment  to  develop  a  use  scenario.  Use 
scenarios  have  been  employed  in  conjunction  with  inspection  techniques  to  bring 
more  context  to  the  inspection  task  [Carroll,  2000,  Haynes,  2004].  The  developed 
scenario is described in Figure 7.a.  

Then  we  conducted  workshops  with  the  teams  to  analyze  the  BCM  tool  in  the 
context of the predefined scenario. In Figure 7.b we show a picture of the BCM tool 
being operated in a workshop.  

We finally elicited from the  workshop participants a collection of comments and 
observations  regarding  the  BCM  tool.  The  workshop  revealed  that  when  the 
disruptive situations occur, the personal experience of the involved operators strongly 
influences shared situation awareness. I.e., when highly experienced operators happen 
to be available during the emergency situation, it is easier to collectively understand 
the causes, implications and consequences of the event. The BCM tool was perceived 
as  relevant  to  establish  shared  situation  awareness  and  document  the  situation, 
especially  when  less  experienced  operators  are  confronted  with  the  emergency 
situation.  

The teams also elaborated a set of specific SD that would be most adequate to their 
work  context:  Equipments,  Actors,  Locations,  Actions  and  Activities.  These  SD 
would then be correlated in the following SM: 
•  Actions/Steps, detailing operational activities (e.g., check router X, reboot switch 

Y);  

•  Actors/Steps, defining responsibilities;  
•  Equipment/Actors, expressing who is responsible for the equipment (e.g., who may 

activate a supplier warranty and who is able to inspect a LINUX machine).  

•  Equipments/Locations,  allowing  junior  team  members  to  find  out  the  equipment 

locations (e.g., main gateway of building C6 is located in room 6.3.0.1). 

 
 
 
 

 

 

Sapateiro C., Baloian N., Antunes P., Zurita G.: Developing a Mobile ...

177

Scenario 
 
“From several rooms, were 
reported the lost of network 
connectivity. Some technicians 
were notified by email, while 
others received several 
complaints by phone. The 
senior technician that received 
some of these complaints 
suspects the central switch 
located in the main building.”  
 
How the proposed tool may 
help diagnosing, planning and 
coordinating recovery actions? 

 

Figure 7: Inspection: a) scenario; and b) interaction with the BCM tool 

Regarding  usability  issues,  the  participants  suggested  some  additional  design 
improvements. Better support to navigate the SC tree was highly recommended. The 
participants regarded the maintenance of awareness information as a major challenge, 
emphasizing the potential problems of  having “aged” information and the overhead 
resulting  from  the  need  to  input  time-dependent  information.  The  participants 
suggested asking the validity of correlations in the SM: as correlations age, the users 
could  be  prompted  to  report  on  their  validity;  a  visualization  schema  could  also 
express the aging of correlations, making the users aware of the information validity.  

7   Discussion 

The main organizational failures managing disruptive situations seem to be rooted on 
a lack of collective awareness about the ongoing situation, plus communication and 
information  management  problems  [Kanno,  2006,  McManus,  2007,  Milis,  2007]. 
Therefore we regard increasing the level of shared situation awareness a fundamental 
requirement  for  BCM.  The  BCM  teams  that  participated  in  our  research  supported 
this view.  

To accomplish this endeavor, we adapted the Swiss-Cheese Model [2008] to BCM. 
This model allowed us to articulate the main information elements required by shared 
situation awareness. These elements were organized in SM.  

We  also  consider  that  situation  awareness  must  be  combined  with  planning  and 
response actions. The SC tree supports this complex work structure through specific 
SM  and  SD  such  as,  for  instance,  the  Actions/Steps  and  Actors/Steps  matrixes 
identified by the BCM teams that participated in our experiments.  

Nevertheless, events, awareness and actions are often difficult to disentangle. The 
traditional linear models of accident trajectory, such as the Domino Model [Heinrich, 

 

178

Sapateiro C., Baloian N., Antunes P., Zurita G.: Developing a Mobile ...

1931], suggest that there is some intrinsic order over time, from event to awareness 
and then action, but the reality is the disorder within and between such elements is 
what most defines disruptive situations [Kelly, 1998].  

Typical  approaches  to  accident  management  rooted  on  linear  models  have  been 
criticized  for  only  distinguishing  the  major  stages  in  accident  trajectories  [Kelly, 
1998], forgetting that different stages may occur at the same time (e.g., awareness and 
action) and also avoiding many non-linear relationships between the various elements 
(e.g., actions may change awareness). Overall, the linear models seem to provide few 
insights about the actual unfolding of a disruptive situation.  

Considering  the  actual  complexity  of  disruptive  situations,  the  response  should 
instead focus on systemic views such as the one proposed by Joint Cognitive Systems 
[Hollnagel,  2005].  These  new  approaches  emphasize  the  contextual,  situated, 
contingencial  and  interactive  relationships  between  multiple  system  elements.  The 
proposed BCM tool adopts this view. The BCM tool is capable to maintain in realtime 
 the  multiple  interdependencies  between  events,  actions,  actors,  contexts,  plans 
and  any  other  factors  involved  in  disruptive  situations.  Furthermore,  the  BCM  tool 
also integrates the planning and response stages, thus contributing to a systemic view 
over BCM.  

Finally,  we  would  like  to  discuss  some  aspects  regarding  the  flexibility  of  the 
proposed  collaboration  model.  Depending  on  the  kinds  of  organizations  and 
disruptive situations, different response structures may exist and emerge. Wybo and 
Latiers  [2006]  say  these  structures  are  typically  role-oriented,  leading  towards  the 
emergence  of  several  distinctive  roles:  coordinators,  preceptors,  analysts  and 
travelers.  The  role  of  travelers  (observers  having  the  goal  to  minimize  the  gap 
between  what  is  happening  in  the  field  and  what  is  perceived  by  the  operations 
control  room)  has  been  greatly  emphasized  in  the  success  of  response  structures. 
Travelers  establish  redundant  closed  loops  and  improve  mutual  knowledge  of  the 
other roles. The BCM tool supports this role.  

The  hierarchical  command  and  control  structures  traditionally  adopted  by  BCM 
teams have also been criticized for not taking into account the emergent properties of 
disruptive  situations,  favoring  a  concentration  of  decision-making  and  putting  too 
much  emphasis  on  hierarchical  communications  and  pre-planning  [Drabek,  2003]. 
Instead,  some  disaster  sociologists  emphasize  that  critical  responses  should  be 
organized  with  decentralized  structures  and  cooperation  between  actors  [Drabek, 
2003].  Of  course  decentralized  structures  require  specific  support,  such  as  the  one 
provided by the BCM tool.  

improvisation  distinguish 

Studies  on  organizational 

two  main  structural 
constraints:  organizational  structure  and  procedural  structure  [Mendonça,  2003]. 
Organizational  structure  should  promote  a  safe  climate  for  improvisation,  while 
procedural structure should provide the mechanisms necessary to reorganize previous 
knowledge  and  experience.  For  instance,  flight  operators  use  Crew  Resource 
Management  training  programs,  not  so  much  to  develop  technical  knowledge  but 
rather  to  build  up  interpersonal  skills,  this  way  fostering  novel  organizational  and 
procedural  structures  [Helmereich,  1999].  The  BCM  tool  adopts  the  same  line  of 
reasoning, developing a collaborative culture where the freedom to construct SM and 
update its information is encouraged.  

 

 

Sapateiro C., Baloian N., Antunes P., Zurita G.: Developing a Mobile ...

179

8   Final Remarks and Future Work  

High-Reliability  Organizations  have  shown  effectiveness  avoiding  disasters  and 
recovering  from  errors.  Research  on  this  type  of  organizations  has  unveiled  the 
concern for more collegial decision-making, decentralization, deference to expertise 
and flexibility [Weick, 2001].  

Group situation awareness emerges as a key functionality to support this behavior. 
Research  in  group  situation  awareness  highlights  the  importance  of  shared 
workspaces  [Gutwin,  2008].  Shared  workspaces  promote  unplanned,  informal  and 
dynamic interactions in team collaboration. In scenarios heavily constrained by time, 
the  concern  with  information  availability,  information  completeness  and  dynamic 
changes leads the decision-making process away from the once-through search for the 
best  action  towards  a  more  cyclic  process  where  the  aim  is  acting  while  trying  to 
understand the  situation. In this line of reasoning, the proposed BCM tool supports 
decision making by allowing users to manipulate a shared information structure that is 
distributed, mobile, shared and control-free.  

Teams  with  high expertise in BCM informed the development of the BCM tool. 
The evaluation data already  obtained indicates the tool is capable to respond to the 
most significant problems faced by BCM teams. Of course further research should be 
conducted to validate the tool during actual disruptive situations. The evaluation data 
already  obtained  also  indicates  the  need  to  improve  information  visualization  and 
interaction.  More  experiments  should  be  conducted  to  optimize  group  situation 
awareness in mobile devices.  

In the near future we will be focusing on improving the way users navigate the SC 
tree.  We  are  also  studying  alternative  interaction  modes,  trying  to  minimize  the 
overhead  necessary  to  maintain  data  validity.  Two  other  issues  are  also  being 
considered  for  future  development.  The  first  one  concerns  using  icons  to  express 
correlations.  The  second  one  regards  alerting  users  about  some  specific  types  of 
correlations.  

Acknowledgements  
The  work  of  this  paper  was  partly  funded  by  Fondecyt  project  1085010  and  the 
Portuguese  Foundation  for  Science  and  Technology  (Projects  PTDC/  EIA/  67589/ 
2006 and PTDC/ EIA/ 102875/ 2008).  

References 

[Antunes, 2008] Antunes, P.: "A Design Framework for Mobile Collaboration"; Encyclopedia 
of E-Collaboration, N. Kock, Ed. Hershey, NY: Information Science Reference, 133138,
 2008. 

[Antunes,  forthcoming]  Antunes,  P.,  Herskovic,  V.,  Ochoa,  S.,  Pino,  J.:  "Structuring 
Dimensions  for  Collaborative  Systems  Evaluation";  ACM  Computing  Surveys, 
forthcoming. 

[Baeza-Yates, 2006] Baeza-Yates, R.,  Pino, J.: "Towards Formal Evaluation of Collaborative 
Work  and  Its  Application  to  Information  Retrieval";  Information  Research,  11(4), 
271, 2006. 

 

180

Sapateiro C., Baloian N., Antunes P., Zurita G.: Developing a Mobile ...

[Baloian,  2009]  Baloian,  N.,    Zurita,  G.:  "Mc-Supporter:  Flexible  Mobile  Computing 
Supporting  Learning  through  Social  Interaction";  Journal  of  Universal  Computer 
Science, 15(9), 1833-1851, 2009. 

[Borges, 2005] Borges, M., Brézillon, P., Pino, J., Pomerol, J.: "Groupware System Design and 
the Context Concept"; Computer Supported Cooperative Work in Design,  v. 3168, 
W.  Shen,  Z.  Lin,  J.  Barthès,  and  T.  Li,  Eds.  Heidelberg:  Springer  Verlag,  45-54, 
2005. 

[Buszko, 2001] Buszko, D., Lee, W., Helal, A.: "Decentralized  Ad-Hoc Groupware API and 
Framework for Mobile Collaboration"; Proceedings of the 2001 International ACM 
SIGGROUP Conference on Supporting Group Work, Boulder, Colorado, USA, 5-14, 
2001. 

[Capata,  2008]  Capata,  A.,  Marella,  A.,  Russo,  R.:  "A  Geo-Based  Application  for  the 
Management  of  Mobile  Actors  During  Crisis  Situations";  Proceedings  of  the  5th 
International ISCRAM Conference, Washington, DC, 2008. 

[Carroll,  2000]  Carroll,  J.:  "Making  Use:  Scenario-Based  Design  of  Human-Computer 

Interactions". Cambridge, MS: The MIT Press, 2000. 

[Drabek,  2003]  Drabek,  T.,    McEntire,  D.:  "Emergent  Phenomena  and  the  Sociology  of 
Disaster:  Lessons,  Trends  and  Oportunities  from  Research  Literature";  Disaster 
Prevention and Management, 12, 97-112, 2003. 

[Endsley,  2003]  Endsley,  M.,  Bolté,  B.,  Jones,  D.:  "Designing  for  Situation  Awareness". 

London: Taylor & Francis, 2003. 

[Gauducheau, 2005] Gauducheau, N., Soulier, E., Lewkowicz, M.: "Design and Evaluation of 
Activity Model-Based Groupware: Methedological Issues"; Proceedings of the 14th 
IEEE  International  Workshops  on  Enabling  Technologies:  Infrastructure  for 
Collaborative Enterprise, Washington, DC, 226-234, 2005. 

[Guerrero, 2006] Guerrero, L., Ochoa, S., Pino, J.: "Selecting Computing Devices to Support 

Mobile Collaboration"; Group Decision and Negotiation, 15, 243-271, 2006. 

[Gutwin,  2008]  Gutwin,  C.,  Greenberg,  S.,  Blum,  R.,  Dyck,  J.,  Tee,  K.,  McEwan,  G.: 
"Supporting  Informal  Collaboration  in  Shared-Workspace  Groupware";  Journal  of 
Universal Computer Science, 14(9), 1411-1434, 2008. 

[Haynes, 2004] Haynes, S., Purao, S., Skattebo, A.: "Situating Evaluation in Scenarios of Use"; 
Proceedings  of  the  2004  ACM  Conference  on  Computer  Supported  Cooperative 
Work, Chicago, Illinois, 92-101, 2004. 

[Heinrich,  1931]  Heinrich,  H.:  "Industrial  Accident  Prevention".  New  York:  McGraw-Hill, 

1931. 

[Helmereich, 1999] Helmereich, R., Merrit, A., Wilhelm, J.: "The Evolution of Crew Resource 
Management  Training  in  Commercial  Aviation";  International  Journal  of  Aviation 
Psychology, 9(1), 19-32, 1999. 

[Herskovic,  2007]  Herskovic,  V.,  Pino,  J.,  Ochoa,  S.,  Antunes,  P.:  "Evaluation  Methods  for 
Groupware  Systems";  Groupware:  Design, 
Implementation,  and  Use.  13th 
International  Workshop,  CRIWG  2007,  Bariloche,  Argentina,  September  2007 
Proceedings, LNCS,  v. 4715, J. Haake, S. Ochoa, and A. Cechich, Eds. Heidelberg: 
Springer-Verlag, 328-336, 2007. 

[Hiles, 2008] Hiles, A.: "The Definitive Handbook of Business Continuity Management". West 

Sussex, England: Wiley, 2008. 

[Hollnagel,  2005]  Hollnagel,  E.,    Woods,  D.:  "Joint  Cognitive  Systems:  Foundations  of 

Cognitive Systems Engineering": CRC Press, 2005. 

[Hughes, 1994] Hughes, J., King, V., Rodden, T., Andersen, H.: "Moving out from the Control 
Room: Ethnography in System Design"; Proceedings of the 1994 ACM conference 
on  Computer  Supported  Cooperative  Work,  Chapel  Hill,  North  Carolina,  429-439, 
1994. 

 

Sapateiro C., Baloian N., Antunes P., Zurita G.: Developing a Mobile ...

181

[Kanno,  2006]  Kanno,  T.,    Furuta,  K.:  "Resilience  of  Emergency  Response  Systems"; 
Proceedings of the Second Resilience Engineering Symposium, E. Hollnagel and E. 
Rigaud, Eds. Antibes, France: Les Presses, 2006. 

[Kelly, 1998] Kelly, C.: "Simplifying Disasters: Developing a Model for Complex Non-Linear 

Events"; Australian Journal of Emergency Management, 14(1), 25-27, 1998. 

[Litu,  2004]  Litu,  R.,    Zeitoun,  A.:  "Infrastructure  Support  for  Mobile  Collaboration"; 
Proceedings  of  the  Hawaii  International  Conference  on  System  Sciences,  Hawaii, 
US, 10031, 2004. 

[Lukosch,  2002]  Lukosch,  S.:  "Adaptive  and  Transparent  Data  Distribution  Support"; 

Proceedings of the CRIWG’02 conference, La Serena, Chile, 255-274, 2002. 

[MacEachren, 2005] MacEachren, A., Cai, G., Sharma, R., Rauschert, I., Brewer, I., Bolelli, L., 
Shaparenko,  B., Fuhrmann,  S., Wang,  H.:  "Enabling  Collaborative  Geoinformation 
Access and Decision-Making through a Natural, Multimodal Interface"; International 
Journal of Geographical Information Science, 19, 293-317, 2005. 

[MacEachren,  2003]  MacEachren,  A.,  Guoray,  C.,  Brewer,  I.,  Chen,  J.:  "Visually  Enabled 
Geocollaboration to Support Data Exploration & Decision Making"; Proceedings of 
the 21st International Cartographic Conference, Durban, South Africa, 10-16, 2003. 

[Mascolo,  2002]  Mascolo,  L.,  Capra,  L.,  Zachariadis,  S.:  "Xmiddle:  A  Data-Sharing 
Middleware  for  Mobile  Computing";  Wireless  Personal  Communications,  12,  77103,
 2002. 

[McManus, 2007] McManus, S., Seville, E., Brunsdon, D., Vargo, J.: "Resilience Management: 
A  Framework  for  Assessing  and  Improving  the  Resilience  of  Organisations"; 
Resilient Organizations, 2007. 

[Mendonça,  2003]  Mendonça,  S.,  Cunha,  M.,  Kaivo-Oja,  J.,  Ruff,  F.:  "Wild  Cards,  Weak 

Signals and Organisational Improvisation"; Futures, 36(29), 201-216, 2003. 

[Milis,  2007]  Milis,  K.,    Walle,  B.:  "IT  for  Corporate  Crisis  Management:  Findings  from  a 
Survey  in  6  Different  Industries  on  Management  Attention,  Intention  and  Actual 
Use";  40th  Hawaii  International  International  Conference  on  Systems  Science, 
Waikoloa, Big Island, HI, 2007. 

[Muñoz,  2003]  Muñoz,  M.,  Rodriguez,  M.,  Favela,  J.,  Martinez-Garcia,  A.,  González,  V.: 
"Context-Aware  Mobile  Communication  in  Hospitals";  Computer,  36(9),  38-46, 
2003. 

[Nielsen, 1994] Nielsen, J.: "Usability Inspection Methods"; Conference on Human Factors in 

Computing Systems, Boston, MS, 413-414, 1994. 

[Pautasso,  2009]  Pautasso,  C.,    Wilde,  E.:  "Why  Is  the  Web  Loosely  Coupled?:  A  MultiFaceted 
Metric for Service Design"; Proceedings of the 18th International Conference 
on World Wide Web, Madrid, Spain, 911-920, 2009. 

[Reason,  2008]  Reason,  J.:  "The  Human  Contribution:  Unsafe  Acts,  Accidents  and  Heroic 

Recoveries". Surrey, England: Ashgate, 2008. 

[Reinhard,  1994]  Reinhard,  W.,  Schweitzer,  J.,  Völksen,  G.,  Weber,  M.:  "CSCW  Tools: 

Concepts and Architectures"; Computer, 27(5), 28-36, 1994. 

[Roda, 2006] Roda, C.,  Thomas, J.: "Attention Aware Systems:  Theories, Applications, and 

Research Agenda"; Computers in Human Behavior, 22(4), 557-587, 2006. 

[Salmon,  2005]  Salmon,  P.,  Stanton,  N.,  Walker,  G.,  Green,  D.:  "Situation  Awareness 
Measurement:  A  Review  of  Applicability  for  C4i  Environments";  Applied 
Ergonomics, 37(2), 225-238, 2005. 

[Schafer,  2007]  Schafer,  W.,  Ganoe,  C.,  Caroll,  C.:  "Supporting  Community  Emergency 
Management Planning through a Geocollaboration Software Architecture"; Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work, 16(4-5), 501-537, 2007. 

[Steves,  2001]  Steves,  M.,  Morse,  E.,  Gutwin,  C.,  Greenberg,  S.:  "A  Comparison  of  Usage 
Evaluation and Inspection Methods for Assessing Groupware Usability"; Proceedings 
of the 2001 International ACM SIGGROUP Conference on Supporting Group Work, 
Boulder, CO, USA, 125-134, 2001. 

 

182

Sapateiro C., Baloian N., Antunes P., Zurita G.: Developing a Mobile ...

[Suchman, 1987] Suchman, L.: "Plans and Situated Actions: The Problem of Human-Machine 

Communication". Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1987. 

[Van  de  Ven,  1976]  Van  de  Ven,  A.,    Delbecq,  A.:  "Determinants  of  Coordination  Modes 

within Organizations"; American Sociological Review(41), 322-338, 1976. 

[Vizcaíno,  2005]  Vizcaíno,  A.,  Martinez,  M.,  Aranda,  G.,  Piattini,  M.:  "Evaluating 
Collaborative  Applications  from  a  Knowledge  Management  Approach";  14th  IEEE 
International Workshops on Enabling Technologies: Infrastructure for Collaborative 
Enterprise (WETICE'05), 221–225, 2005. 

[Vyhmeister,  2006]  Vyhmeister,  R.,  Mondelo,  P.,  Novella,  M.:  "Towards  a  Model  for 
Assessing  Workers’  Risks  Resulting  from  the  Implementation  of  Information  and 
Communication  Systems  and  Technologies";  Human  Factors  in  Ergonomics  & 
Manufacturing, 16(1), 39-59, 2006. 

[Weick,  2001]  Weick,  K.,    Sutcliffe,  K.:  "Managing  the  Unexpected:  Assuring  High 

Performance in an Age of Complexity". San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2001. 

[Wybo,  2006]  Wybo,  J.,    Latiers,  M.:  "Exploring  Complex  Emergency  Situations'  Dynamic: 
Theoretical, Epistemological and Methodological Proposals"; International Journal of 
Emergency Management, 3(1), 40-51, 2006. 

 
 

