Algorithmica (2018) 80:827–829
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00453-017-0394-1

Guest Editorial: Special Issue on Theoretical
Informatics
Evangelos Kranakis1 · Gonzalo Navarro2

Published online: 13 November 2017
© Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2017

This special issue is dedicated to selected papers from the 12th Latin American Symposium 
on Theoretical Informatics (LATIN), which was held on April 11–15, 2016,
in Ensenada, Mexico. The conference includes a wide range of topics in theoretical
computer science that reﬂect the broad interests of the LATIN community, including
algorithms, analytic and enumerative combinatorics, analysis of algorithms, approximation 
algorithms, automata theory, combinatorics and graph theory, complexity
theory, computability, computational algebra, computational geometry, data structures,
 graph drawing, and random structures. All the papers in this issue went through
a rigorous refereeing process and were accepted on the basis of quality. Following is
a brief outline of the accepted papers.

In Routing in unit disk graphs, Kaplan, Mulzer, Roditty, and Seiferth show how
to construct, for any given  > 0, a routing scheme for a unit-disk graph on a set
of points S with stretch 1 + , using labels of O(log n) bits and routing tables of
O(−5 log2 n log2 D) bits, where D is the (Euclidean) diameter of the graph and the
header size is O(log n log D) bits.

Stabbing circles for sets of segments in the plane, by Claverol, Khramtcova,
Papadopoulou, Saumell, and Seara, is concerned with stabbing a set S of circles in
the plane by a line. The problem is shown to be tightly connected to cluster Voronoi
diagrams and the authors provide a method to compute a representation of all the comB 
Gonzalo Navarro

gnavarro@dcc.uchile.cl

Evangelos Kranakis
kranakis@scs.carleton.ca

1

School of Computer Science, Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada

2 Department of Computer Science (DCC), Faculty of Physical and Mathematical Sciences,

University of Chile, Santiago, Chile

123

828

Algorithmica (2018) 80:827–829

binatorially different stabbing circles for S, and the stabbing circles with maximum
and minimum radius.

In Tree compression using string grammars, Ganardi, Hucke, Lohrey, and Noeth
study the compressed representation of a ranked tree by a (string) straight-line program
(SLP) for its preorder traversal, and compare it with the well-studied representation
by straight-line context-free tree grammars.
Independent set of convex polygons: from n to 1 +  via shrinking by Wiese, is
concerned with computing a maximum-weight subset of non-overlapping polygons
from a given set of weighted convex polygons in the plane. By shrinking the polygons
a factor 1 − δ, for an arbitrarily small constant δ > 0, the author is able to improve
the approximation ratio from n to (1 + ).

In Improved spanning ratio for low degree plane spanners, Bose, Hill, and Smid
describe an algorithm that builds a plane spanner with a maximum degree of 8 and a
spanning ratio of≈ 4.414 with respect to the complete graph. This is the best currently
known spanning ratio for a plane spanner with a maximum degree of less than 14.

In the paper On the planar split thickness of graphs, Eppstein, Kindermann,
Kovourov, Liotta, Lubiw, Maignan, Mondal, Vosoughpour, Whitesides, and Wismath
investigate the planar split thickness of a graph, that is, the smallest k such that the
graph is k-splittable into a planar graph. They study the concept for complete graphs,
complete bipartite graphs, multipartite graphs, bounded degree graphs, and genus-1
graphs, and prove that it is NP-hard to recognize graphs that are 2-splittable into a
planar graph.

In Simple approximation algorithms for balanced MAX 2SAT, Paul, Poloczek, and
Williamson study algorithms for the balanced MAX 2SAT problem. They show that
such instances have a simple structural property from which they are able to show
that a large class of greedy algorithms, including Johnson’s algorithm, gives a 3/4approximation 
algorithm for balanced MAX 2SAT.

In Faster information gathering in ad-hoc radio tree networks, Chrobak and
Costello provide two deterministic algorithms for gathering in unknown, ad-hoc networks 
with tree topologies. For the model that does not assume any collision detection
nor acknowledgement mechanisms, they give an O(n log log n)-time algorithm and
also show that this running time can be further reduced to O(n) if the model allows
for acknowledgements of successful transmissions.

In Improved approximation algorithms for capacitated fault-tolerant k-center, Fernandes,
 de Paula and Pedrosa are concerned with capacitated α-fault-tolerant k-center,
where the centers have a limit on the number of assigned elements, and, if any α centers 
fail, there is a reassignment from the metric space V to non-faulty centers. They
present a new approach to tackle fault tolerance, by selecting and pre-opening a set of
backup centers, then solving the obtained residual instance and analyzing the resulting
approximation factors.

In Comparison-based buffer management in QoS switches, Al-Bawani, Englert,
and Westermann are concerned with the following online problem arising in network
devices. In each time step, an arbitrary number of packets arrive at a single buffer and
only one packet can be transmitted. The differentiated service concept is implemented
by attributing each packet with a non-negative value corresponding to its service level.
The goal is to maximize the total value of transmitted packets. They consider the FIFO

123

Algorithmica (2018) 80:827–829

√
and the bounded-delay model. In the former model they show a 1+1/
2 lower bound
on the competitive ratio of any deterministic comparison-based algorithm, while in
the latter they show that no deterministic comparison-based algorithm exists with a
competitive ratio below 2.

829

We would like to express our deepest appreciation to the authors of the papers, the
referees for their careful and valuable reviews, and Ming-Yang Kao, the editor-in-chief
of Algorithmica, for giving us the opportunity to edit this special issue.

123

