A Pattern Matching Based Filter for Audit
Reduction and Fast Detection of Potential

Intrusions

Josu´e Kuri1(cid:1), Gonzalo Navarro2, Ludovic M´e3, and Laurent Heye3

1 ENST, Department of Computer Science and Networks

Paris, France
kuri@enst.fr

2 University of Chile, Department of Computer Science

Santiago, Chile

gnavarro@dcc.uchile.cl

3 Sup´elec, Campus de Rennes, France,

Ludovic.Me@supelec.fr

Laurent.Heye@supelec.fr

Abstract. We present a pattern matching approach to the problem of
misuse detection in a computer system, which is formalized as the problem 
of multiple approximate pattern matching. This permits very fast
searching of potential attacks. We study the probability of matching of
the model and its relation to the ﬁltering eﬃciency of potential attacks
within large audit trails. Experimental results show that in a worst case,
up to 85 % of an audit trail may be ﬁltered out when searching a set of
attacks without probability of false negatives. Moreover, by ﬁltering 98
% of the audit trail, up to 50 % of the attacks may be detected.

1 Introduction

Research in intrusion detection has emerged in recent years as a major subject
in the computer security ﬁeld because of the diﬃculty of ensuring that information 
systems are free from security ﬂaws. Computer systems suﬀer from security
vulnerabilities regardless of their purpose, manufacturer or origin. It is both technically 
hard and economically costly to ensure that systems are not susceptible
to attacks.

Two approaches have been proposed to address the problem: anomaly detection 
(see for example [1,2]) and misuse detection (see for example [3]). The
former suggests that user’s activity in the system can be characterized so that a
proﬁle of “normal utilization” of the system is established and excursions from
this proﬁle are ﬂagged as potential intrusions, or attacks in a more general sense.
The latter assumes that attacks are well-known sequences of actions, called scenarios 
or attack signatures, and that the activity of the system (in the form of
(cid:1) Partially supported by CONACyT grant #122688.

H. Debar, L. M´e, and F. Wu (Eds.): RAID 2000, LNCS 1907, pp. 17–27, 2000.
c(cid:1) Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2000

18

Josu´e Kuri et al.

logs, network traﬃc, etc.) may be audited in order to determine the presence of
such scenarios in the system.

Anomaly detection leads to some diﬃculties: a ﬂow of alarms is generated
in the case of a noticeable systems environment modiﬁcation and a user can
slowly change his behavior in order to cheat the IDS. On the other hand, misuse 
detection becomes an increasingly demanding task in terms of semantics
and processing, as more sophisticated attacks are discovered every day (which
implies an increasing number of sophisticated scenarios to search for in audit
trails). These challenges have lead to a research trend aimed to a simpliﬁed representation 
of the problem in order to improve performance and eﬃciency of
detection. In the short term, eﬀective intrusion detection systems will incorporate 
a number of techniques rather than a “one-strategy-ﬁts-all” approach. The
greater the variety of available tools is, the better the IDS is.

In this spirit, we introduce an original intrusion detection model inspired by
the misuse detection approach. Its main goal is to provide an intrusion detection
system for fast detection of potential attacks rather that accurate (i.e., exhaus-
tive) detection of actual attacks. The results of such a detection (i.e., ﬁltered
audit trails, in which attacks may be present) would be used in turn as input for
a more accurate detection algorithm. This idea was already at the root of the
GasSATA IDS, which use a genetic algorithm with this aim in view [4].

We formalize a concrete instance of the misuse detection problem as a pattern
matching problem which permits very fast searching of potential attacks. We
then study the statistics of this model and their relation to ﬁltering eﬃciency of
potential attacks in the resulting system.

Section 2 explains our proposed intrusion detection model and the constraints
of the problem. Section 3 gives analytical and experimental results on the probability 
of matching. Section 4 presents our testing system and experimental
results. Finally, conclusions and future works are presented.

2 Intrusion Detection as a Pattern Matching Problem

In general terms, the misuse detection problem is to detect the existence of a
priori known series of events within the traces of activity of a system to protect.
Traces widely diﬀer in their origin, form and content, depending on the type
of potential attacks that they attempt to cover. For example, traces in the form
of network traﬃc collected by a ﬁrewall or a sniﬀer may be used to detect wellknown 
attacks to implementations of a TCP/IP protocol stack. Another example
are the logs of commands typed by users of a multi-user computer. In both
cases, traces may be collected at a single place (e.g., an ethernet segment, a host
computer) or at multiple locations simultaneously. We consider the detection of
attacks using logs (audit trails) of commands typed by users of a distributed
computer system. In this context, attacks appear to be typically short sequences
of no more than 8 commands.

We propose to model the misuse detection problem as a pattern matching
problem in the following way: auditable commands in the system can be seen

