Flexible and Eﬃcient Bit-Parallel Techniques for
Transposition Invariant Approximate Matching

in Music Retrieval

Kjell Lemstr¨om1 and Gonzalo Navarro2(cid:1)

1 Department of Computer Science, University of Helsinki, Finland

2 Department of Computer Science, University of Chile

klemstro@cs.helsinki.fi

gnavarro@dcc.uchile.cl

Abstract. Recent research in music retrieval has shown that a combinatorial 
approach to the problem could be fruitful. Three distinguishing
requirements of this particular problem are (a) approximate searching
permitting missing, extra, and distorted notes, (b) transposition invariance,
 to allow matching a sequence that appears in a diﬀerent scale, and
(c) handling polyphonic music. These combined requirements make up a
complex combinatorial problem that is currently under research. On the
other hand, bit-parallelism has proved a powerful practical tool for combinatorial 
pattern matching, both ﬂexible and eﬃcient. In this paper we
use bit-parallelism to search for several transpositions at the same time,
and obtain speedups of O(w/ log k) over the classical algorithms, where
the computer word has w bits and k is the error threshold allowed in
the match. Although not the best solution for the easier approximation
measures, we show that our technique can be adapted to complex cases
where no competing method exists, and that are the most interesting in
terms of music retrieval.

1 Introduction

Combinatorial pattern matching with its many application domains have been an
active research ﬁeld already for several decades. One of the latest such domains
is music retrieval. Indeed, music can be encoded as sequences of symbols, i.e. as
strings. At a rudimentary level this is done by taking into account exclusively the
order of the starting times of the musical events (i.e., the note ons) together with
their pitch information (i.e. the frequency, the perceived height of the musical
event). On a more complicated level one can use several distinct attributes for
each of the events (see e.g. [1,9]). Most of the interesting musical attributes used
in such symbolic representations are directly available in MIDI format [13] which
is a commonly used compact symbolic representation.

A straightforward application of general string matching techniques on symbolic 
music representation, however, does not suﬃce for musically pertinent

(cid:1) Partially supported by Fondecyt Grant 1-020831.

M.A. Nascimento, E.S. de Moura, A.L. Oliveira (Eds.): SPIRE 2003, LNCS 2857, pp. 224–237, 2003.
c(cid:1) Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

Flexible and Eﬃcient Bit-Parallel Techniques

225

matching queries; music has special features that have not been considered in
general string matching techniques. Firstly, music is often polyphonic, i.e., there
are several events occurring simultaneously (in a case where there exists no simultaneous 
events the music is said to be monophonic). These simultaneous
events may have a collective meaning and, therefore, the polyphony has to be
preserved and taken into account in the matching process. For instance, a typical
music retrieval, or searching problem, is the distributed string matching problem:
given a set t (called a text or a target) of h strings (each representing a voice)
i ∈ {1 . . . h}, for some constant h and a pattern p = p1, . . . , pm,
ti = ti
we say that p occurs at position j of t if p1 = ti1
j+1, . . . , pm = tim
j+m−1
for some {i1, . . . , im} ∈ {1 . . . h}. The problem has been studied in [7,10].

j , p2 = ti2

1, . . . , ti
n,

Secondly, western people tend to listen music analytically by observing the
intervals between the consecutive pitch values more than the actual pitch values
themselves: A melody performed in two distinct pitch levels is perceived and
recognized as the same regardless of the performed pitch level. This leads to
the concept of transposition invariance. Formally, the transposition invariant
distributed string matching problem is as follows. Given a monophonic pattern p
n, i ∈ {1, . . . , h}, the task is to
and a polyphonic target t of h voices, ti = ti
1
ﬁnd all the js such that p1 = ti1
j + c, p2 = ti2
j+m−1 + c holds,
for some constant c and {i1, . . . , im} ∈ {1, . . . , h} [10].

··· ti
j+1 + c, . . . , pm = tim

Thirdly, real music is often decorated, i.e., it may contain grace notes or ornamentations,
 for instance. The conventional procedure to overcome this problem
is to allow gaps between the consecutive matching elements in found occurrences 
[2,6,16]. The choices are either to use parametrized gapping (as in [2,6])
or arbitrary gapping (as in [16]). As we aim at a matching method that ﬁnds all
the occurrences (although it may also ﬁnd spurious ones), we will use the latter
approach. Instead of using the geometric approach of Wiggins et al. [16], we
will use the string matching framework and apply the indel distance (the dual
of LCS-matching) [5]. We claim that it is a more fruitful approach not to drop
any occurrences although in some situations it may lead to a large number of
spurious occurrences. The set of found occurrences may then be post-processed
by musically motivated ﬁlters, for instance by those discussed in [12].

Fourthly, in a typical transposition invariant distributed string matching application 
the query pattern is given by humming. This kind of an application
is sometimes referred as ”WYHIWYG” (What You Hum Is What You Get) or
”query by humming”. In such a case we may expect that all the events in the
hummed query pattern are relevant, but its (absolute) pitch values may be somewhat 
distorted. This distortion has the form of Gaussian distribution with the
mean value of the correct (desired) pitch and with a relatively small variance.
Therefore, in a WYHIWYG application, we would like to enable some tolerance
for such errors. Here we consider two solutions for this problem, the ﬁrst of
which is the so-called δ-matching [3]. The pattern p = p1 ··· pm is said to have a
δ-match in t1 ··· tn if pi ∈ [tj+i−1−δ, tj+i−1+δ] for all i = 1, . . . , m. Although this
approach works reasonably well in practice, it is musically more appropriate to
penalize an error according to how much the pitch diﬀers from the desired one

