A Formal Approach to Qualitative Reasoning on

Topological Properties of Networks

Andrea Rodr´ıguez1,3 and Claudio Gutierrez2,3

1 Department of Computer Science, Universidad de Concepci´on

2 Department of Computer Science, Universidad de Chile

andrea@udec.cl

cgutierr@dcc.uchile.cl

3 Center for Web Research, Universidad de Chile

Abstract. Qualitative reasoning uses a limited set of relevant distinctions 
of the domain to allow a ﬂexible way of representing and reasoning
about it. This work presents a conceptual framework for qualitative reasoning 
about information networks from a spatial-topological point of
view. We consider the properties of connectivity and some topological
invariants to describe the structural characteristics of and the topological 
relationships between networks. The paper presents a data model for
networks which generalizes the notion of graph, founded in algebraic and
topological considerations. Such conceptual tool can be useful in diﬀerent
domains, from social to technological networks.

1 Introduction

Topological properties are related to the concept of connectivity, upon which
diﬀerent relations may be deﬁned; for example, overlapping, inside, disjoint and
meet. An important extension beyond the power of traditional query languages
for graph and networks is the incorporation of topological relationships into the
primitves of query languages. These facts have already been recognized in the
spatial domain, where topological relations have played an important role for
spatial reasoning [9,1] and query languages [13].

A formal approach to this subject is beneﬁcial for several reasons. The formalism 
serves as a tool to identify and derive systematically relationships while
avoiding redundant and contradicting relations and notions, and helps proving
the completeness of the set of relationships. The formal method can be applied
to determine the relation between any two networks and to reason formally
about them. Algorithms to determine relationships can be speciﬁed exactly, and
mathematically sound models will help to deﬁne formally the relationships. The
formalism can extend deﬁnitions on networks to more general concepts on networks.


Topological and spatial reasoning is a well established subject dealing with
the development of formal models for deﬁning and reasoning about topological
characteristics of spatial objects and topological relations [10]. When trying to
extend these techniques to sets of overlapping networks the following important
issues arise:

S. Staab and V. Svatek (Eds.): EKAW 2006, LNAI 4248, pp. 358–365, 2006.
c(cid:2) Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

A Formal Approach to Qualitative Reasoning

359

– The standard notion of graph does not suﬃce to represent faitfully the information.
 Note that an edge could be part of a network which does not
have both of its end-nodes (e.g. the sub-network of Latin American routes
consisting of Chilean cities and LanChile’s routes: a ﬂight going out of the
country is an edge which has only one node in the sub-network).

– Graphs do not behave like sets of point nor as “point-less objects.” Hence
from a topological point of view, the approach should be a mixture of pointset 
topology and point-less topology

– The classic set of operations on graphs must be enriched to be able to express

in a ﬂexible manner spatio-topological relations among networks.

– Standard spatial notions cannot be taken as on-the-shelf technology for

networks.
This work presents a formal framework for topological reasoning on relationships 
among network properties, particularly focusing on connectivity aspects.
It discusses the level of abstraction needed, that is, what are the “good” objects
in this domain, and what are the “good” operations to act over these objects. It
presents several operations on them and studies their properties. In addition, it
introduces the main approaches used in spatial reasoning for deﬁning topological
relations between networks. Such deﬁnitions can be applied to broad application
domains, such as social networks, technological networks, and conceptual or
metadata networks. In particular we:

Related Work. To the best of our knowledge the subject of this paper has not
been addressed formally. There is related work on spatial reasoning which is
useful in our context, and that we describe below.

In the spatial domain, qualitative reasoning of topological relations has obtained 
particular attention from the research community, since it allows automatic 
reasoning based on a cognitively plausible representation of spatial concepts 
[10]. Most of the work on topological qualitative reasoning deﬁne ontologies 
of spatial entities, where some fundamental concepts are contact, parthood
and boundary [4,1,9]. Stell and Worboys [14] present a theory of parthood and
boundary that can be connected to diﬀerent formalisms for topological relations.
This formalism represents set of regions as a bi-Heyting algebra [7] and expresses
certain important constructors on the regions purely in terms of the operations
presented in the algebra. One of the examples they give is the algebra of graphs.
We follow some of these ideas when looking for the right data structure for
networks and operations over it, but consider a more general notion of graph.

Two well known ontologies for topological spatial relations are the Region
Connected Calculus (RCC) [1] and the point-set topological model [9,8]. RCC is
a logic-based formalization of topological relations that uses a basic connectivity
relation between closed regions. The point-set topological model deﬁnes topological 
relations based on the set intersection of the interior, boundary and exterior
of spatial objects. Such formalism uses relation algebra [6] to create an inference
mechanism given by the composition of topological relations [11]. Although both
models result in the same set of topological relations between spatial regions,
they diﬀer in their reasoning capabilities. While reasoning with relation algebras

360

A. Rodr´ıguez and C. Gutierrez

has computational advantages, axiomatic theories are richer in their expressive
power.

2 The (abstract) Model

In this section we introduce a general framework to model networks and present
the algebraic properties of diﬀerent categories of objects and their operations.
We will use the basic graph terminology as in Diestel’s Book [12].

Deﬁnition 1 (Semigraph). Let U = (VU , EU ) be a graph.
1. A semigraph over U is a pair (V, E), where V ⊆ VU and E ⊆ EU .
2. A net is a semigraph (V, E) such that for each uv ∈ E it holds that either

u ∈ V or v ∈ V .

Note that a graph (in the classical sense) is a semigraph such that E ⊆ V × V .
In what follows, there will be always a universe graph U = (VU , EU ) which will
be the “space” on which the objects we deal with live in.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 1. Basic notions: (a) semigraph, (b) net, and (c) graph. Dark nodes and edges
belong to the semigraph, net or graph, respectively.

Notations. Let V ⊆ VU be a set of nodes, let E ⊆ EU be a set of edges, and let
G be an arbitrary semigraph. We will denote by VG its set of nodes and by EG
its set of edges.
Use uv to denote the undirected edge {u, v}. A node v and an edge e are
incident if e = vw for some w. inc(V ) is the set of edges {uv ∈ EU : u ∈ V ∨ v ∈
V }. Similarly, inc(E), is the set of nodes {v ∈ VU : uv ∈ E} sg(V ) will denote the
semigraph (V, inc(V )). Similarly, sg(E) will denote the semigraph (inc(E), E),
and sg(G) will denote the semigraph (VG ∪ inc(E), EG ∪ inc(V )).
Deﬁnition 2 (Basic operations on semigraphs). Let G1 = (V1, E1) and
G2 = (V2, E2) be semigraphs.
1. The union of G1 and G2 (denoted G1∪G2) is the semigraph (V1∪V2, E1∪E2).
2. The intersection of G1 and G2 (denoted G1 ∩ G2) is the semigraph (V1 ∩
3. The diﬀerence of G1 and G2 (denoted G1−G2) is the semigraph (V1−V2, E1−
2, is the semigraph

E2). In particular, the complement of G2, denoted Gc
U − G2.

V2, E1 ∩ E2).

A Formal Approach to Qualitative Reasoning

361

Using the fact that the product of two Boolean algebras with the operations
deﬁned pairwise is again a Boolean algebra we get:
Proposition 1. The set of semigraphs with the operations of union, intersection
and complement, together with 0 deﬁned as (∅,∅) and 1 = (U, U×U) is a Boolean
algebra.

The Algebraic Structure of Networks. One can enrich the Boolean Algebra structure 
of semigraphs described above by deﬁning closure operators over semigraphs,
 and hence, a structure of Topological space (Kuratowski space).
A closure operator (cl) must satisfy some properties for each element of the
domain. Two basic properties are cl(∅) = ∅ and G ⊆ cl(G). In addition, by
property cl(G∪H) = cl(G)∪cl(H), one needs to specify only cl over single nodes
and single edges. From the idempotence property (cl(cl(G)) = cl(G)) it follows
that cl(v) should add no nodes (or do trivial things like adding nodes independent
of v, e.g. the whole universe, all isolated nodes, etc.) Similarly for cl(e) for an edge
e. In fact, the only two natural choices for closure are: (1) clE(G) = sg(E(G)),
and (2) clV (G) = sg(V (G)). But the topologies they generate are not essentially
diﬀerent:
Lemma 1. Let TE and TV the topologies induced by the closure operators clE
and clV respectively. Then G is open in TE if and only if G is closed in T2.

Heyting Algebras Via Closure Operators. Every topology provides a complete
Heyting algebra in the form of its open set lattice. The Heyting algebra is deﬁned 
as follows: objects are open sets; operations are set-theoretical union and
intersection; and the element A ⇒ B is the interior of the union of Ac∪B, where
Ac denotes the complement of the open set A.

For the operator clV the open sets are standard full subgraphs of U (complements 
of the closed sets in the topology TV ). Here the border (given by the
topology) of G is the set of edges in the complement of G which are incident to
G. The operator clE is the dual of the previous one.

The Heyting Algebra of Nets. Note that the objects deﬁned in the Heyting
algebras induced by the open sets of the topological spaces deﬁned above were
essentially graphs (or complements of graphs).

It is possible to extend the set of objects to be considered to semigraphs
without loose edges (what we have called nets) and still having a structure of
Heyting algebra by slightly modifying the operations of join and meet. Nets are
operationally generated as follows: (1) choose a set of nodes V and (2) choose
a set of edges incident to V . The induced operations (in order to be closed
in this new universe) are the standard union and the meet G1 ∧ G2 deﬁned as
(G1∩G2)∩sg(V (G1∩G2)) (observe that the standard intersection of semigraphs
could leave isolated edges).
Proposition 2. Let R(U) be the set of nets over U. If we deﬁne 0 = ∅ (the
empty semigraph), G1∨G2 as the union, G1∧G2 as deﬁned above, and G1 ⇒ G2
as sg(V c

1 ) ∪ G2, then (R(U),∨,∧,⇒, 0) is a Heyting algebra.

362

A. Rodr´ıguez and C. Gutierrez

Note that this is not a bi-Heyting algebra because the existence of nets R such
that there are edges uv (cid:10)∈ R with u, v ∈ R. Example: let R = U − {uv}. Then
there is no unique minimal solution for U ≤ R ∪ X, because, for example,
X1 = ({u}, uv) and X2 = ({v}, uv) are minimal solutions.

Interestingly, the problem described in the previous paragraph is the only

barrier to have a bi-Heyting algebra.

∗(U) the set of full nets over U (i.e. nets such that the
Proposition 3. Let R
complement has no isolated edges, that is, it is again a net). If we deﬁne the same
operations as in Proposition 2 and 1 = U and G1 \ G2 as (sg(Ec
2) ∧ G1,
then ((U),∨,∧,⇒,\, 1, 0) is a bi-Heyting algebra.

2) ∪ Gc

3 Possible Approaches to Deﬁne Connectivity in

Networks

We examined the structure and operations over networks. In this section we
will study the notion of when two objects (semigraphs) in this universe are
“connected” or have “relationships”.

3.1 A Pure Topological Approach

Although pure topological notions are oriented to capture the concept of continuity,
 several notions from topology can be borrowed to speak of spatial notions 
[8,9]. We start from these notions, but will be interested in the notions
of connectivity or relationship, and thus some concepts will naturally not be
applicable in our context.

Following the approach of Egenhofer [8] we will build the framework on the
notions of boundary and interior. Due to the particularities of our domain, we
will add a third notion, that of frontier.

Deﬁnition 3 (Interior, Frontier, Boundary, Closure). Let U be the universal 
graph, and H a semigraph in U.

1. The boundary of a semigraph H (in U), denoted ∂(H), is the set of edges
which are incident to H and its complement, i.e., the set of edges uv of U
such that u ∈ H and v /∈ H. (Note that edges uv /∈ H with u ∈ H and v ∈ H
are not in the boundary).
In particular, we deﬁne δ(H) = ∂(H) ∩ H as the real boundary.

∂(H).

2. The frontier of a semigraph H (in U), denoted fr(H), is the set of nodes
of H adjacent to nodes not in H. (Or equivalently: the set of nodes of H
incident to ∂(H).)
In particular, we deﬁne fr
of fr(H) incident to edges not in H.

(H), the real frontier, as the subset of the nodes

3. The interior of a semigraph H (in U), denoted int(H), is the semigraph
consisting of all nodes and edges of H not incident with elements not in H.
4. The closure of a semigraph H (in U), denoted cl(H), is the semigraph H ∪

(cid:4)

A Formal Approach to Qualitative Reasoning

363

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 2. Basic topological notions. Dark nodes and edges constitute the semigraph. (a)
reference semigraph; (b) boundary (continuous dark line is the real boundary); (c)
frontier (ﬁlled dark nodes form the real frontier); and (d) interior.

Proposition 4 (The boundary ∂)

plement.

closure of H and its complement.

1. ∂(H) has no interior.
2. ∂(H) = cl(H) ∩ cl(G − H), i.e. the boundary of H is the intersection of the
3. ∂(H) = ∂(G − H), i.e. the boundary of H equals the boundary of its com4.
 ∂(H) = ∅ iﬀ H = ∅ or H = G.
Based on these deﬁnitions, one can derive topological relations between networks
by considering the intersections between their topological invariants (i.e., interior,
 boundary and frontier), that is, the intersections between the components of
networks that do not change under topological transformations (e.g. translation,
scaling, and rotation).

Given any two connected nets H1 and H2 in U, let int(H1) and int(H2)
be their interiors, and D(H1) and D(H2) be the union of their respective real
frontiers with real boundary. Table 1 presents the eight matrices that derive the
10 possible 4-intersection matrices between nets.

3.2 The Region Connected Calculus RCC

RCC is a formalism for spatial reasoning that takes regions of space instead of
points of classical geometry as primitives. For this, a primitive notion of connectivity 
is introduced by means of a binary predicate C(x, y), whose semantics is
that of “x is connected to y.’”

In the context of networks, the basic primitive is naturally deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 4. C(x, y) is true iﬀ there is a path from x to y in x∪ y (where path
is the standard notion in graph theory [12])
Note that if x ∩ y (cid:10)= ∅ then C(x, y), but the notion deﬁned allow C(x, y) to be
true even though x ∩ y = ∅.

The RCC deﬁnitions (we will use the RCC-8 framework) are axiomatized
in standard ﬁrst-order logic using quantiﬁers over variables ranging over the
objects of the domain (regions in the spatial case) (see Table 2). The axioms
for semigraphs concides roughly with the naive intuition in the spatial domain.

364

A. Rodr´ıguez and C. Gutierrez

Table 1. The basic 2x2 matrices upon which all possible 4-intersections matrices are
derivable. Dark nodes and edges belong to one or both nets.

Matrices

Examples

Matrices

Examples

int(H2) D(H2)

0
0

0
0

int(H2) D(H2)

1
0

0
0

int(H2) D(H2)
0
0
int(H2) D(H2)

1
1

1
1

1
0

int(H1)
D(H1)

int(H1)
D(H1)

int(H1)
D(H1)

int(H1)
D(H1)

int(H2) D(H2)

0
0

0
1

int(H2) D(H2)

1
0

0
1

int(H2) D(H2)
0
1
int(H2) D(H2)

1
1

1
1

1
1

int(H1)
D(H2)

int(H1)
D(H1)

int(H1)
D(H1)

int(H1)
D(H1)

Table 2. RCC-8 deﬁnitions depending on the range of the quantiﬁcation of the variables 
involved: over semigraphs and over nets. inc(x, y) means x is incident to y.

Relation
DC(x, y)

Quantif. over semigraphs
No path between
x ⊆ y
P (x, y)
x ⊂ y
P P (x, y)
EQ(x, y)
x = y
x ∩ y (cid:6)= ∅
O(x, y)
x ∩ y = ∅
DR(x, y)
x ∩ y (cid:6)= ∅ ∧ x (cid:6)⊆ y ∧ y (cid:6)⊆ x
P O(x, y)
x ∩ y = ∅ ∧ inc(x, y)
EC(x, y)
x ⊂ y ∧ inc(x, yc)
T P P (x, y)
N T T P (x, y) x is a nontangential proper part of y x ⊂ y ∧ ¬ inc(x, yc)

Interpretation
x is disconnected from y
x and y in x ∪ y
x is a part of y
x is a proper part of y
x is equivalent with y
x overlaps y
x is discrete from y
x partially overlaps y
x is externally connected to y
x is a tangential proper part of y

The problems are subleties centered on non-existent edges between two nodes
of the domain. In this framework it is more evident the insuﬃciency of graphs
as basic data structure for qualitative reasoning. In such case, C(x, y) must be
deﬁned as intersection of nodes and the deﬁnitions would colapse into standard
set theoretical notions among nodes.

4 Conclusions

This work presents a formal framework for qualitative reasoning about topological 
properties of networks. It studies the structure of sets of overlapping networks

A Formal Approach to Qualitative Reasoning

365

from a spatio-topological point of view, deﬁnes a data structure and operations
associated with networks, and states and proves main properties of them.

For future work, we plan to select a standard set of operations that serves as
basic for a query language design and that can relate the abstract model to the
approaches for deﬁning the connectivity in networks.

Acknowledgements. This work has been funded by Nucleus Millenium Center
for Web Research, Grant P04-067-F, Mideplan, Chile.

References

1. D. A. Randell, Z. Cui, A. G. Cohn, A Spatial logic based on regions and connection,
 Proc. 3rd. Int. Conf. on Knowledge Representation and Reasoning, Morgan
Kaufmann, San Mateo, pp. 165-176.

2. A. G. Cohn, B. Bennett, J. Gooday, N. M. Gotts, Qualitative Spatial Representation
and Reasoning with the Region Connection Calculus, Geoinformatica, 1, 1-44 (1997)
3. J. de Kleer, J. Brown, A Qualitative Physics Based on Conﬂuences. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 
24, 7-83, (1984)

4. B. Smith, Mereotopology - A Theory of parts and boundaries, Data and Knowledge

Engineering, 20, 287-303 (1996)

5. J. Sharma, D. Fleweling, M. Egenhofer, A Qualitative Spatial Reasoner, International 
Symposum on Spatial Data Handing, pp. 665-681, September 1994.

6. A. Tarski, On The Calculus of Relations, Journal of Symbolic Logic, 6(3), 73-89

(1941)

7. S. Vickers, Topology via Logic, Cambridge University Press, 1989.
8. M. J. Egenhofer, A Formal Deﬁnition of Binary Topological Relationships, Lecture

Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 367, pp. 457-472, June 1989.

9. M. J. Egenhofer, R. Franzosa Point-Set Topological Spatial Relations, International

Journal of Geographic Information Science, 5(2), 161-174 (1991)

10. Loiviero Stock Spatial and Temporal Reasoning, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1997.
11. M. J. Egenhofer Deriving the Composition of Binary Topological Relations, Journal

of Visual Languages and Computing, 5, 133-149 (1994)

12. R. Diestel, Graph Theory, Springer, New York, 1997.
13. E. Clementini, J. Sharma, M. Egenhofer, Modeling Topological Spatial Relations:
Strategies for Query Processing, International Journal of Computer and Graphics,
18 (6),815-822 (1994)

14. J. G. Stell, M. F. Worboys, The Algebraic Structure of Sets of Regions, Lecture

Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 1329, pp. 163-174, Octuber 1997.

