RDF  as  a  Data  Model 

(Invited  Talk) 

Claudio  Gutierrez * 

Center  for Web Research,  Computer  Science Department,  Universidad  de Chile, 

Blanco Encalada  2120, 3er piso, Santiago,  Chile.  cgutierrOdcc.uchile.cl 

Abstract 

The  Resource  Description  Framework  (RDF)  is the  W3C  recommendation  lan(cid:173)
guage for  representing  metadata  about  Web resources. It  is the  basic data  layer 
of  the  Semantic  Web.  The  original  design  was  influenced  by  the  Web,  library, 
XML  and  Knowledge  representation  communities.  The  driving  idea  was  a  lan(cid:173)
guage  to  represent  information  in  a  minimally  constraining  and  flexible  way. 
It  turns  out  that  the  impact  of  the  proposal  goes  far  beyond  the  initial  goal, 
particularly  as a model for representing information  with  a graph-like  structure. 
In  the  first  half  of  the  talk  we  will  review  RDF  as  a  database  model,  that 
is,  from  a  data  management  perspective.  We  will  compare  it  with  two  data 
models  developed  by  the  database  community  which  have  strong  similarities 
with  RDF,  namely,  the  semistructured  and  the  graph  data  models.  We  will 
focus  the  comparison  on  data  structures  and  query  languages. 

In  the  second  half  of the  talk,  we will  discuss  some  of the  challenges  posed 

by  RDF  to  the  Computer  Science  Theory  Community: 

1.  RDF  as  data  model:  Database  or  knowledge  base? 
2.  Abstract  model  for  RDF:  What  is a  good  foundation? 
3.  Concrete  -real  lifeRDF 
 data:  What  are  the  interesting  fragments? 
4.  Theoretical  novelties  of the  RDF  data  model:  Are  there  any? 
5.  RDF  Query  Language:  Can  the  database  experience  be  of  any  help? 
6.  Infrastructure  for large-scale evaluation  of data  management  methodologies 

and  tools  for  RDF:  Waiting  for  something? 

7.  Storing,  Indexing,  Integrity  Constraints,  Visualization  et  al.:  Theory  is  re(cid:173)

quired. 

The speaker  acknowledges  the support  of Millennium  Nucleus Center  for Web Re(cid:173)
search,  Grant  P04-067-F,  Mideplan, Chile. 

Please use the following  format  when  citing  this  chapter: 

Gutierrez,  C,  2006,  in  International  Federation  for  Information  Processing,  Volume  209,  Fourth  IFIP 
International  Conference  on Theoretical  Computer  Science-TCS  2006, eds. Navarro,  G., Bertossi,  L., Kohayakwa,
  Y., (Boston: Springer), p. 7. 

