Equations in Free Semigroups with

Anti-involution and Their Relation to Equations

in Free Groups

Claudio Guti(cid:19)errez1;2

1 Computer Science Group, Dept. of Mathematics, Wesleyan University
2 Departamento de Ingenier(cid:19)(cid:16)a Matem(cid:19)atica, D.I.M., Universidad de Chile

(Research funded by FONDAP, Matem(cid:19)aticas Aplicadas)

cgutierrez@wesleyan.edu

Abstract. The main result of the paper is the reduction of the problem
of satis(cid:12)ability of equations in free groups to the satis(cid:12)ability of equations
in free semigroups with anti-involution (SGA), by a non-deterministic
polynomial time transformation.
A free SGA is essentially the set of words over a given alphabet plus an
operator which reverses words. We study equations in free SGA, generalizing 
several results known for equations in free semigroups, among them
that the exponent of periodicity of a minimal solution of an equation E
in free SGA is bounded by 2O(jEj).

1 Introduction

The study of the problem of solving equations in free SGA (uni(cid:12)cation in free
SGA) and its computational complexity is a problem closely related to the problem 
of solving equations in free semigroups and in free groups, which lately have
attracted much attention of the theoretical computer science community [3], [12],
[13], [14].

Free semigroups with anti-involution is a structure which lies in between that
of free semigroups and free groups. Besides the relationship with semigroups and
groups, the axioms de(cid:12)ning SGA show up in several important theories, like
algebras of binary relations, transpose in matrices, inverse semigroups.

The problem of solving equations in free semigroups was proven to be decidable 
by Makanin in 1976 in a long paper [10] . Some years later, in 1982, again
Makanin proved that solving equations in free groups was a decidable problem
[11]. The technique used was similar to that of the (cid:12)rst paper, although the
details are much more involved. He reduced equations in free groups to solving
equations in free SGA with special properties (‘non contractible’), and showed
decidability for equation of this type. For free SGA (without any further condi-
tion) the decidability of the problem of satis(cid:12)ability of equations is still open,
although we conjecture it is decidable.

Both of Makanin’s algorithms have received very much attention. The enumeration 
of all uni(cid:12)ers was done by Ja(cid:11)ar for semigroups [6] and by Razborov

G. Gonnet, D. Panario, and A. Viola (Eds.): LATIN 2000, LNCS 1776, pp. 387{396, 2000.
c(cid:13) Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2000

388

C. Guti(cid:19)errez

for groups [15]. Then, the complexity has become the main issue. Several authors
have analyzed the complexity of Makanin’s algorithm for semigroups [6], [16], [1],
being EXPSPACE the best upper-bound so far [3]. Very recently Plandowski,
without using Makanin’s algorithm, presented an upper-bound of PSPACE for
the problem of satis(cid:12)ability of equations in free semigroups [14]. On the other
hand, the analysis of the complexity of Makanin’s algorithm for groups was done
by Koscielski and Pacholski [8], who showed that it is not primitive recursive.

With respect to lower bounds, the only known lower bound for both problems
is NP-hard, which seems to be weak for the case of free groups. It is easy to see
that this lower bound works for the case of free SGA as well.

The main result of this paper is the reduction of equations in free groups to
equations in free SGA (Theorem 9 and Corollary 10). This is achieved by generalizing 
to SGA several known results for semigroups, using some of Makanin’s
results in [11], and proving a result that links these results (Proposition 3).
Although we do not use it here, we show that the standard bounds on the exponent 
of periodicity of minimal solutions to word equations also hold with minor
modi(cid:12)cations in the case of free SGA (Theorem 5).

For concepts of word combinatorics we will follow the notation of [9]. By (cid:15)

we denote the empty word.

2 Equations in Free SGA

A semigroup with anti-involution (SGA) is an algebra with a binary associative 
operation (written as concatenation) and a unary operation ( )−1 with the
equational axioms

(xy)z = x(yz);

(xy)−1 = y−1x−1;

x−1−1 = x:

(1)

A free semigroup with anti-involution is an initial algebra for this variety. It is
not di(cid:14)cult to check that for a given alphabet C, the set of words over C [ C−1
together with the operator ( )−1, which reverses a word and changes every letter
to its twin (e.g. a to a−1 and conversely) is a free algebra for SGA over A.

Equations and Solutions. Let C and V be two disjoint alphabets of constants
and variables respectively. Denote by C−1 = fc−1 : c 2 Cg. Similarly for V −1.
An equation E in free SGA with constants C and variables V is a pair (w1; w2) of
words over the alphabet A = C[C−1[V [V −1. The number jEj = jw1j+jw2j is
the length of the equation E and jEjV will denote the number of occurrences of
variables in E. These equations are also known as equations in a paired alphabet.
A map S : V −! (C [ C−1)(cid:3) can be uniquely extended to a SGAhomomorphism 
(cid:22)S : A(cid:3) −! (C [ C−1)(cid:3) by de(cid:12)ning S(c) = c for c 2 C and
S(u−1) = (S(u))−1 for u 2 C [ V . We will use the same symbol S for the map
S and the SGA-homomorphism (cid:22)S. A solution S of the equation E = (w1; w2)
is (the unique SGA-homomorphism de(cid:12)ned by) a map S : V −! (C [ C−1)(cid:3)
such that S(w1) = S(w2). The length of the solution S is jS(w1)j. By S(E)
we denote the word S(w1) (which is the same as S(w2)). Each occurrence of

