5
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
6

 

 
 
]
L
D
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
0
6
9
1
0

.

3
0
5
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Conferences vs. Journals:

Throwing the baby out with the bath water?

Claudio Gutierrez

Computer Science Department

Universidad de Chile

March 2010

Criticism of the conference model should be put in context. Evidence suggests that the
essential features of this model have emerged as responses to challenges posed by current
trends of scientiﬁc research and the impact of the new techno-economic paradigm: the age of
Information and Communication Technology [8]. The economic, social and technical impact
of this revolution on the whole scientiﬁc research cycle is beginning to be assessed [5, 10].
At the center of it is our discipline, computing science (CS), that in this process is reﬂecting
on its identity and relationship with other disciplines [4, 11].

This context seems indispensable when discussing today’s problems of scientiﬁc evaluation,
 in particular the Conference vs. Journal (CvJ) debate. This debate, also, would
beneﬁt from systematic historical and sociological studies of these practices. This ground
would help to ponder the criticism of the conference model by showing that a great percentage 
of the problems like the rapid increase in the number of submissions, skimpy and
slow reviews, declining paper quality, pressures from academia and publishers, are aﬀecting
the whole system, be it conference or journal [7, 12]. In this article we brieﬂy develop these
arguments.

Evaluation in Classical Sciences. Although their origins can be traced to scientiﬁc
societies, it is in the nineteen century that the journal and peer review models as we know
them today emerged. The system evolved without major changes until the second half of
the 20th century, when it was shaken by the new printing and communication technologies
(photocopies, email, Web, etc.). Editorial boards evolved from a group of people whose
main goal was to ﬁnd enough material to ﬁll the pages of the journal, into a huge ﬁltering
system whose goal turned to enforce minimum standards and discard unsound works [2].
Recognized today as the essence of scientiﬁc evaluation, peer review has been lately the
center of heated discussions in all disciplines [1, 9, 12]. The journal model, in its origin had
two driving forces: the need to incorporate more articles into the publishing process, and to
encourage scientists to disclose their work (by giving credit and prestige to the author) [3].

1

The ﬁrst one is not needed anymore, but a new one has emerged: to measure “productivity”
in a system of science where accountability plays an increasing role [10].

Regarding our CvJ debate, another facet of this history seems more relevant. Scientiﬁc
societies held periodic meetings where their members presented their works and advancements 
in their disciplines. At the beginning, journal contents were almost a compilation of
these presentations. The method did not scale and these practices split: on one hand today’s
journals, and on the other, periodic meetings of the society where members used to present
their ﬁndings and ideas. Journals got under evaluation methods to check the relevance of
submissions, while meetings kept a natural ﬁlter: to be member of the society. These two
forms of communicating scientiﬁc research made their own way.

The advent of Conferences. For some sociological reason, a strange event, a mix of
meetings and journals, was developed in our discipline. Opinions and remembrances ascribe
this phenomena to the particular nature of the “products” of the discipline; the perception
that CS has a diﬀerent speed from other sciences; the few journals available and the long
delays in refereeing and publishing; facilities given by traveling in the jet age; the avoidance
of wasting time in polishing for a journal material already presented in conferences. (See
CACM, vol 52, Nos. 1,4,5,8 and links from there). The need to test these hypotheses
becomes evident when reading the most widespread of them: “Quick development of the ﬁeld
required quick review and distribution of results”, which although intuitive, does not explain
conferences (Letters in other ﬁelds give much “faster” review and dissemination times). The
phase transitions of this process are also important. Table 1, showing rough statistics based
on the information of the ACM Digital Library, indicates that conferences/workshops are
inﬂuential in the ﬁeld at least since the early 1970’s when the numbers exploded. The
series LNCS, which publishes mainly CS events proceedings, began in the seventies with a
dozen a year and since then it has grown to reach currently more than ﬁve hundred a year.
The data, although illustrative, is by any means apt to derive deﬁnitive conclusions, because
parameters like attendance, impact, spreading, relevance, etc. of these events is not weighed.
Deﬁnitively a systematic study is needed to put the CvJ debate on solid grounds.

Conferences vs. Journals. A big part of the discussions on CvJ focuses on criticism
on the current conference model. Bad quality of papers, splintering of communities, few
attendees, reviews done under extreme time and workload pressures, are among the typical
complaints. Many of them are also found in current criticism of journals. Thus to contribute
to the debate, it seems important to isolate characteristics that are inherent to conferences.
Below we present a ﬁrst approximation.

• Time constraints for the researcher. Enforcing research deadlines puts time pressure.
On the contrary, journals allow submissions at any moment, giving more freedom and
relaxed pace to research. Deadlines are slightly being incorporated into journals, e.g.
“special issues”, Proc. of the VLDB Endowment, etc. Regarding time constraints for
reviewers, the conference practice is being increasingly adopted by journals, by ﬁxing
review times.

2

Period
Before 1960
1960-64
1965-69
1970-74
1975-79
1980-84
1985-89
1990-94
1995-99
2000-04
2005-09

Journals Conf. (still existing) Conf. (not existing today)

1
0
1
0
4
3
0
4
3
9
13

0
2
7
11
4
8
23
22
46
55
38

2
0
0
3
2
2
14
18
13
25
6

Table 1: Number of ACM Journals and Conferences by birth date

• Space constraints. Limiting the size of articles puts pressure on the form of communication.
 Only the essential without details is presented. The motivations seem to
be time review constraints and fast communication. This notion is rather foreign to
classical journals, although Letters have incorporated it long ago.

• Boolean decisions. This is one of the distinctive characteristics of the conference model.
As the number of submissions grow, many journals are incorporating sharper decisions
methods (limited resubmission rounds, etc.) Under the think/act dichotomy, this
method incentives action rather than deliberation.

• Discussion post-publication. Real testing of hypothesis begins after the conference
(where only a sketch –“extended abstract– is expected) under an open-world scrutiny.
On the contrary, journals expect articles to be deﬁnitive once published. Testing is
done before by reviewers in a closed world.

• Evaluation by batch. Evaluation is done on a set of submissions at a time. Hence,
implicitly the value of a paper is weighed against their peers in the same event. This
method introduces the notion of ranking among submissions and bias in favor of fashions,
 groups, and mainstream developments.

• Changing board of editors. The notion of Program Committee (PC) is in my opinion one
of the cornerstones of the system. Complemented by the Steering Committee ensuring
long term stability, PC’s reﬂect and enforce the mobility of areas, topics, people and
criteria. Today journal editorial boards are rather closed and stable groups, not without
inbreeding, limiting innovation.

• Dissemination of ideas done by the producer.

I think this is the kernel of the conference 
model, and a feature not suﬃciently highlighted in the discussion on CvJ.

3

Conferences/workshops are (easily) organized by the interested researchers in a new
ﬁeld, who initiate a spiral of contributions/evaluation/dissemination that ultimately
will shape a new area if persisting in time. The key point is that there is no need of
intermediaries, and the growth process parallels that of the community. In this sense, it
resembles the origins of scientiﬁc societies that shaped current branches of knowledge.
(There is a signiﬁcant link between this feature and current discussions on the future
of publishing, open journals, etc.)

• Physical presence, face-to-face meeting. This has been assumed to be the most distinctive 
characteristic of the conference model. What is surprising and intriguing is
that the community leading virtual communications and immaterial production is the
one that seems more prone to physical meetings. Is this a contradiction? Let us remark 
that in our age of rapid communications, the other characteristics of conferences
discussed do not need physical contact or presence.

Being aware of the role and power of –and in favor of enforcing– face-to-face communication 
and physical bonds, I rather disagree that it is the essence of what has rocketed
the conference model.

Final Comments. The conference model reﬂects fairly well our times. Like it or not, the
ﬁrst three characteristics discussed are typical of today’s social and economical rhythms, and
ﬁt very well modern time constraints in any area. Arguments stating that the conference
“has fractured the discipline and skewered it towards short-term deadline driven research”
point rightly to consequences, not to causes.
In fact, these are general trends observable
in all disciplines. Many of the aspects blamed to conferences are part of a new paradigm
of science development (called “Mode 2” in the literature) characterized by the steering of
research priorities, accountability of science and commercialization of research. This mode
of development –their advocates state–, would have superseded the classical model (“Mode
1”) characterized by the hegemony of theoretical or, at any rate, experimental science, by an
internally-driven taxonomy of disciplines, and by the autonomy of scientists and their host
institutions, the universities [10].

Deﬁnitively, when reading the CvJ debate, one cannot but bring to mind broader discussions 
on the transformation of the scientiﬁc method in our age. I think we should incorporate
them into our discussion in order to fairly assess the contributions of conferences to current
scientiﬁc developments.

References

[1] Three Views of Peer Review, Notices AMS 50, 6, 2003.

[2] J. C. Burnham, The Evolution of Editorial Peer Review, JAMA Vol 263, 10, 1990,

1323-1329.

4

[3] H. Zuckerman, R. K. Merton, Patterns of Evaluation in Science: Institutionalization,

Structure and Functions of the Referee System, Minerva Vol 9, 1, 1971.

[4] P. J. Denning, Computing’s Paradigm, CACM 52, 12, 2009.

[5] T. Hey, S. Tansley, K. Tolle, Jim Gray on eScience: a transformed scientiﬁc method,

in: The Fourth Paradigm: Data-Intensive Scientiﬁc Discovery, 2009.

[6] B. Meyer, C. Choppy, J. Staunstrup, J. van Leeuwen, Research Evaluation for Computer

Science, CACM 52, 4, 2009.

[7] J. Crowcroft, S. Keshav, N. McKeown, Scaling the academic publication process to Internet 
scale. CACM 52, 1, 2009.

[8] Ch. Freeman, F. Louca, As Time Goes By, From the Industrial Revolutions to the

Information Revolution, Oxford Univ. Press, 2001.

[9] S. Haack, Peer Review and Publication: Lessons for Lawyers, Stetson Law Review, Vol.

36, No. 3, 2007.

[10] H. Nowotny, P. Scott, M. Gibbons, ’Mode 2’ revisited: The new production of knowledge

- Introduction Minerva 2003; 41 (3): 179-194.

[11] M. Shaw, What Makes Good Research in Software Engineering?, Int. J. Softw. Tools for

Technology Transfer, 2002, vol 4, 1, 1-7.

[12] R. Smith, The trouble with medical journals, J.R. Soc. Med., 2006; 99: 115-119.

5

