The Existential Theory of Equations with

Rational Constraints in Free Groups is

PSPACE{Complete

Volker Diekert1, Claudio Guti(cid:19)errez2, and Christian Hagenah1

1 Inst. f¨ur Informatik, Universit¨at Stuttgart

Breitwiesenstr. 20-22, D-70565 Stuttgart

diekert@informatik.uni-stuttgart.de, christian@hagenah.de

2 Centro de Mod. Matem(cid:19)atico y

Depto. de Ciencias de la Computaci(cid:19)on, Universidad de Chile

Blanco Encalada 2120, Santiago, Chile

cgutierr@dcc.uchile.cl

Abstract. This paper extends extends known results on the complexity
of word equations and equations in free groups in order to include the
presence of rational constraints, i.e., such that a possible solution has
to respect a speci(cid:12)cation given by a rational language. Our main result
states that the existential theory of equations with rational constraints
in free groups is PSPACE{complete.
Keywords: Formal languages, equations, regular language, free group.

1 Introduction

In 1977 (resp. 1983) Makanin proved that the existential theory of equations in
free monoids (resp. free groups) is decidable by presenting algorithms which solve
the satis(cid:12)ability problem for a single word equation (resp. group equation) with
constants [13,14,15]. These algorithms are very complex: For word equations the
running time was (cid:12)rst estimated by several towers of exponentials and it took
more than 20 years to lower it down to the best known bound for Makanin’s
original algorithm, which is to date EXPSPACE [7]. For equations in free groups
Ko(cid:19)scielski and Pacholski have shown that the scheme of Makanin is not primitive
recursive.

Recently Plandowski found a di(cid:11)erent approach to solve word equations and
showed that the satis(cid:12)ability problem for word equations is in PSPACE, [18].
Roughly speaking, his method uses data compression ((cid:12)rst introduced for word
equations in [19]) plus properties of factorization of words. Guti(cid:19)errez extended
this method to the case of free groups, [9]. Thus, a non-primitive recursive scheme
for solving equations in free groups was replaced by a polynomial space bounded
algorithm.

In this paper we extend the results [18,9] above in order to include the presence 
of rational constraints. Rational constraints mean that a possible solution
has to respect a speci(cid:12)cation which is given by a regular word language. Our main
result states that the existential theory of equations in free groups with rational
constraints is PSPACE{complete. The corresponding PSPACE{completeness for

A. Ferreira and H. Reichel (Eds.): STACS 2001, LNCS 2010, pp. 170{182, 2001.
c(cid:13) Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2001

The Existential Theory of Equations with Rational Constraints

171

word equations with regular constraints has been announced by (cid:12)rst Rytter, see
[18, Thm. 1] and [20].

The idea to consider regular constraints in the case of word equations is due
to Schulz [21]. The importance of this concept, pointed out (cid:12)rstly by Schulz, can
be exempli(cid:12)ed by: the application of Schulz’ result to monadic simultaneous rigid
E-uni(cid:12)cation [6]; the use of regular constraints in [5] as a basic (an necessary) tool
when showing that Makanin’s result holds in free partially commutative monoids;
the proof, in a forthcoming paper of Diekert and Muscholl, of the decidability of
the existential theory of equations in graph groups (open problem stated in [5])
by using the present result; and the positive answer, by Diekert and Lohrey [4],
to the question (cf [16]) about the existential theory of equations in free products
of free and (cid:12)nite groups is decidable by relying on the general form of Theorem 2
below (we allow (cid:12)xed points for the involution on Γ ).

Our paper deals with the existential theory. For free groups it is also known
that the positive theory without constraints is decidable, see [15]. Thus, one can
allow also universal quanti(cid:12)ers but no negations. Note that we cannot expect
that the positive theory of equations with rational constraints in free groups
be decidable, since we can code the word case (with regular constraints) which
is known to be undecidable. On the other hand, a negation leads to a positive
constraint of a very restricted type, so it is a interesting question under which
type of constraints the positive theory remains decidable.

Our proof of Theorem 1 is in the (cid:12)rst step a reduction to the satis(cid:12)ability
problem of a single equation with regular constraints in a free monoid with
involution. In order to avoid an exponential blow-up, we do not use a reduction as
in [15], but a much simpler one. In particular, we can handle negations simply by
a positive rational constraints. In the second step we show that the satis(cid:12)ability
problem of a single equation with regular constraints in a free monoid with
involution is still in PSPACE. We extend the method of [18,9] such that it copes
with the involution and with rational constraints. There seems to be no direct
reduction to the word case or to the case of free groups without constraints. So
we cannot use these results as black boxes. Because there is not enough space to
present the whole proof in this extended abstract, we focus on those parts where
there is a substantial di(cid:11)erence to the case without constraints. In particular,
we develop the notion of maximal free interval, a concept which can be used
even when there are no constraints, but when one is interested in other solutions
rather than the one of minimal length. The missing proofs can be found in [10]
which is available on the web.1

2 Equations with Rational Constraints in Free Groups
Rational Languages, Equations. Let (cid:6) be a (cid:12)nite alphabet and let (cid:6) = f a j
: Γ ! Γ
a 2 (cid:6) g. We use the convention that a = a. De(cid:12)ne Γ = (cid:6) [ (cid:6). Hence
(cid:3) by a1 (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) an = an (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) a1 for n (cid:21) 0 and
is an involution which is extended to Γ
ai 2 Γ . We usually will write just Γ instead of (Γ; ). A word w 2 Γ
(cid:3) is freely
reduced, if it contains no factor of the form aa with a 2 Γ .

1

In http://inf.informatik.uni-stuttgart.de/ifi/ti/veroeffentlichungen/psfiles is the (cid:12)le

HagenahDiss2000.ps

