Consistent Answers from Integrated Data

Sources

Leopoldo Bertossi1, Jan Chomicki2, Alvaro Cort´es3, and Claudio Guti´errez4

1 Carleton University, School of Computer Science, Ottawa, Canada.

2 University at Buﬀalo, Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering.

bertossi@scs.carleton.ca

3 Pontiﬁcia Universidad Catolica de Chile, Departamento de Ciencia de

chomicki@cse.buffalo.edu

Computaci´on, Santiago, Chile. acortes@ing.puc.cl

4 Universidad de Chile, Center for Web Research, Departamento de Ciencias de la

Computaci´on, Santiago, Chile. cgutierr@dcc.uchile.cl

Abstract. When data sources are integrated into a single global system,
inconsistencies wrt global integrity constraints are likely to occur. In this
paper, the notion of consistent answer to a global query in the context of
the local-as-view approach to data integration is characterized. Furthermore,
 a methodology for generating query plans for retrieving consistent
answers to global queries is introduced. For this purpose, an extension of
the inverse-rules algorithm for deriving query plans for answering ﬁrstorder 
queries is presented.

1 Introduction

In the last few years, due the increasing number of information sources that are
available and may interact, the subject of data integration has been widely studied 
from diﬀerent points of view. Topics like mediated schemas, query containment,
 answering queries using views, etc., have been considered in this context.
However, the important issue of consistency of data derived from the integration
process and query answering has attracted less attention.

A data integration system provides a uniform interface to several information 
sources. This interface, referred as global schema or mediated schema, is a
context-dependent set of virtual relations used to formulate queries to the integrated 
system. When the user queries the system in terms of the global schema,
a query processor or a mediator is in charge of rewriting the global query into a
query plan that will eventually access the underlying information sources.

In order to perform this query rewriting, the processor needs a mapping
between the mediated schema and the information sources. Two paradigms have
been proposed to provide this mapping. One of them, called the Local-as-View
(LAV) approach [15], considers each information source as a view deﬁned in
terms of relations in the global schema. The Global-as-View (GAV) approach
considers each global predicate as a view deﬁned in terms of the source relations
[20,21].

T. Andreasen et al. (Eds.): FQAS 2002, LNAI 2522, pp. 71–85, 2002.
c(cid:1) Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2002

72

L. Bertossi et al.

In this paper we concentrate on the LAV approach. This scenario is more
ﬂexible than GAV for adding new data sources into a global system. Actually,
preexisting data sources in the system do not need to be considered when a new
source is introduced. In consequence, inconsistencies are more likely to occur.
Furthermore, from the point of view of studying the logical issues around consistency 
of data, the LAV paradigm seems to be more challenging than the GAV.
The latter is closer to the classical problem of consistency of views deﬁned over
relational databases.

In the context of the LAV approach, several algorithms have been proposed
to rewrite a global query into a query plan that accesses the data source relations
to answer the original query [13]. Some of them assume that certain integrity
constraints (ICs) hold at the global level, and they use the ICs in the query
plan generation. In [12], a rewriting algorithm that uses functional and inclusion
dependencies in the mediated schema is proposed. In [8], another algorithm for
query plan generation that uses functional and full dependencies is introduced.
This algorithm may take a global query written in Datalog as an input. In [10],
a deductive, resolution based approach to data integration is presented. It may
also use global integrity constraints in the deductive derivation of the query plan.
Actually, there are situations where, without assuming that certain global ICs
hold, no query plan can be generated [13].

However, it is not obvious that certain desirable, global ICs will hold at the
global level. After all, the data is in the sources, the global relations are virtual
and there may be no consistency checking mechanism at the global level. Furthermore,
 and particularly in the LAV approach, it is not clear what it means for
the global system to be consistent, because we do not have a global instance. Actually,
 given a set of data sources, there may be several potential global instances
that (re)produce the data sources as views according to the view deﬁnitions.

A global system consists of a global schema and a collection of materialized
data sources that are described as views over the global schema. In this context,
 it is quite natural to pose queries at the global level, expecting to retrieve
those answers that are consistent wrt a given set of global ICs, because, as we
mentioned before, global ICs may be easily violated due to the lack of a global
maintenance mechanism. As the following example shows, each data source, with
its own, independent maintenance mechanism, can be consistent, but inconsistencies 
may arise when the sources are integrated.
Example 1. Consider the global relation R(X, Y ) and two source relations {V1(a,
b), V1(c, d)} and {V2(a, c), V2(d, e)} described by the view deﬁnitions:

V1(X, Y ) ← R(X, Y )

V2(X, Y ) ← R(X, Y ).

Then, the global functional dependency (FD) R : X → Y is violated, but not
the local FDs V1 : X → Y , V2 : X → Y .
✷

In [3], the problem of characterizing and computing consistent query answers
from a single, inconsistent relational database instance was addressed. In this
case, the database instance r is considered inconsistent when it does not satisfy

