A Geometric Approach to the Bisection Method

Claudio Gutierrez1, Flavio Gutierrez2, and Maria-Cecilia Rivara1

1 Department of Computer Science, Universidad de Chile

Blanco Encalada 2120, Santiago, Chile
{cgutierr,mcrivara}@dcc.uchile.cl

2 Universidad de Valpara´ıso

Valpara´ıso, Chile

Abstract. The bisection method is the consecutive bisection of a triangle 
by the median of the longest side. This paper introduces a taxonomy
of triangles that precisely captures the behavior of the bisection method.
Our main result is an asymptotic upper bound for the number of similarity 
classes of triangles generated on a mesh obtained by iterative
bisection, which previously was known only to be ﬁnite. We also prove
that the number of directions on the plane given by the sides of the
triangles generated is ﬁnite. Additionally, we give purely geometric and
intuitive proofs of classical results for the bisection method.

1 Introduction

Longest-side bisection algorithms for the reﬁnement of 2-dimensional triangulations 
were developed to ﬁll a gap in the design of adaptive software for ﬁnite
element applications to analyze physical problems described by partial diﬀerential 
equations, where the availability of algorithms able to produce automatic
and local reﬁnement of the mesh is crucial. A discussion of the algorithms and
some generalizations can be found in [4,5]. These algorithms were designed to
take advantage of the non-degeneracy properties of the iterative longest-side
bisection (bisection method) of triangles, which essentially guarantee that consecutive 
bisections of the triangles nested in any triangle t0 of smallest angle σ0
produce triangles t (of minimum angle σt) such that σt ≥ σ0/2, and where the
number of non-similar triangles generated is ﬁnite.

The systematic study of the bisection method began in a series of papers [2,
7,8,9,1] around two decades ago. First, Rosenberg and Stenger [7] proved that
the method does not degenerate the smallest angle of the triangles generated
by showing that it does not decrease beyond σ/2, where σ is the smallest angle
from the triangle we started.

Then Kearfott [2] proved a bound on the behavior of the diameter (the length
of the longest side of any triangle obtained). In [8] a better bound was presented
for certain triangles. This bound was improved independently by Stynes [9] and
Adler [1] for all triangles. From their proofs they also deduced that the number of
classes of similarity of triangles generated is ﬁnite, although they give no bound.
There is very little research so far on complexity aspects of the bisection
method. Although it is known that diﬀerent types of triangles behave radically

M. Farach-Colton (Ed.): LATIN 2004, LNCS 2976, pp. 172–180, 2004.
c(cid:1) Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

A Geometric Approach to the Bisection Method

173

diﬀerent under iterative bisection (“good” and “bad” triangles), no systematic
classiﬁcation of them is known.

This paper attempts to ﬁll these gaps in the analysis of the bisection method.
We present a precise taxonomy that captures the behavior of the bisection
method for diﬀerent types of triangles. We introduce as main parameter the
smallest angle and prove that in the plane it predicts faithfully the behavior of
the bisection method. We use this framework to prove new results and to give
intuitive proofs of classical results.

The contributions of this paper are as follows:

– A taxonomy of triangles reﬂecting the behavior of the bisection method. We

consider six classes of triangles, and two main groups.

– An asymptotic bound on the number of non-similar triangles generated. We
prove a super-polynomial upper bound, identify the instances where this
bound is polynomial, and describe worst case instances.

– An analysis of lower bounds on the smallest angle of triangles in the mesh

obtained using the bisection method for each class of triangles deﬁned.

– A proof that there is a ﬁnite number of directions in the plane generated by
the corresponding segments (sides) of the triangles generated, and asymptotic 
bounds on this number.

Additionally, we present a uniﬁed view of the main known results for the
bisection method from an elementary geometry point of view. This approach
allows intuitive proofs and has the advantage of presenting the geometry inherent
to the method.

2 Notation and Preliminaries

Capital letters denote points on the plane. In order to simplify we will avoid
extra symbols and sometimes overload some notations. AB denotes a segment
as well as the length of this segment usually denoted by AB. An angle ∠ACB
denotes the actual instance as well as the value (measure) of it. A circumference
of center A and radius r is denoted by C(A, r).

C

A

D

B

Fig. 1. Triangle ABC with AB ≥ BC ≥ CA. D is the midpoint of AB.

A bisection, by the median of the longest side, of triangle ABC with AB ≥
BC ≥ CA, is the ﬁgure obtained by tracing the segment CD, where D is the

