Equivalence of OLAP Dimension Schemas

Carlos A. Hurtado and Claudio Guti´errez

Department of Computer Science

Universidad de Chile

{churtado,cgutierr}@dcc.uchile.cl

Abstract. Dimension schemas are abstract models of the data hierarchies 
that populate OLAP warehouses. Although there is abundant work
on schema equivalence in a variety of data models, these works do not
cover dimension schemas. In this paper we propose a notion of equivalence 
that allows to compare dimension schemas with respect to their
information capacity. The proposed notion is intended to capture dimension 
schema equivalence in the context of OLAP schema restructuring.
We oﬀer characterizations of schema equivalence in terms of graph and
schema isomorphisms, and present algorithms for testing it in well known
classes of OLAP dimension schemas. Our results also permit to compare
the expressiveness of diﬀerent known classes of dimension schemas.

1 Introduction

OLAP dimensions are data hierarchies that populate data warehouses. These
entities are hierarchically organized information that deﬁne the perspective upon
which the data is viewed. As an example, in a data warehouse we may have
dimensions describing products, stores and time, which may be used to visualize
the facts generated by a sales process.

Figure 1 depicts a dimension that models ﬁnancial services oﬀered by a bank:
accounts, credit cards and loans. On the left hand side of Figure 1, there is a
graph called hierarchy schema which models the structure of the dimension.
The vertices of this graph are called categories. On the right hand side, there
is another graph, called hierarchy domain, whose vertices, called members, are
grouped by categories and ordered by a child/parent relation. For example, in
the dimension at hand, we may say that member p1 belongs to the category
P roduct and p1 has d1 as a parent in the category Department.

In the dimension at hand, some types of products, like personal loans and
some sorts of accounts, are handled by branches, whereas others, like mortgage
and corporate loans, are handled by departments. Only the products in branches
are classiﬁed through the hierarchy path P roduct-P rodT ype-P rodClass-All.
There is a manager in charge of each branch and department. Finally, it happens
that the Asia branch and all departments handle products in only one category;
thus, their managers belongs to a member in P rodClass.

D. Seipel and J.M. Turull-Torres (Eds.): FoIKS 2004, LNCS 2942, pp. 176–195, 2004.
c(cid:1) Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004

Equivalence of OLAP Dimension Schemas

177

all

Account Loan CredCard

m1 m2 m3 

m4

All

Manager

Department

Branch

d1 d2 

b1 b2

b3

BLoan AccA AccB

ProdClass

ProdType

Product

(A)

p1 p2

p3  p4

p5

p6 p7

(B)

Fig. 1. The dimension Product: (A) hierarchy schema; (B) child/parent relation.

1.1 Dimension Schemas

A dimension schema is an abstract model of a dimension commonly used to
support summarizability reasoning in OLAP applications [HM02], that is, to
test whether aggregate views deﬁned for some categories can be correctly derived 
from a set of precomputed views deﬁned for other categories. A dimension
schema, being an abstract representation of a dimension, represents the set of
possible dimensions that conforms to it. This set reﬂects the information capacity 
of the schema. Thus when we perform reasoning on the schema, we infer
properties of all the dimensions in the set.

A central drawback of traditional dimension schemas is that they do not
account for structural heterogeneity. Such schemas model dimensions in which
members in a category c should have a parent in every category directly above
c, a condition we refer to as homogeneity. This restriction is unnatural since
in many application domains the members of a category have parents (resp.,
ancestors) in diﬀerent sets of categories. As an example, in the hierarchy domain
of Figure 1 (B), some products are under branches while some others are under
departments.

In previous work [HM02] we introduced semantically rich dimension schemas
to support summarizability reasoning in heterogeneous dimensions. In our setting,
 dimension schemas are modeled as a hierarchy schema along with a set of
integrity constraints, called dimension constraints. The hierarchy schema represents 
a set of links for the child/parent relation, that is, whenever we have a
child/parent relationship between two members in two categories, the categories
must be directly connected in the hierarchy schema. Dimension constraints are
statements that specify legal paths allowed in the hierarchy domain. The constraints 
are used to place further restrictions to let the schema capture more
precisely diﬀerent sets of dimensions.

For example, we may require that all the products handled by some
branch are not handled by departments, and vice versa. This is stated by

