Linked Open Data Technologies for Publication of
Census Microdata

Gustavo Pabón, Claudio Gutiérrez, Javier D. Fernández, and Miguel A. Martínez-Prieto
Department of Computer Science, University of Chile, Avenida Blanco Encalada 2120, 837-4059 Santiago,
Chile. E-mail: {gpabon,cgutierr,jafernan,mmartine}@dcc.uchile.cl

Javier D. Fernández and Miguel A. Martínez-Prieto
Dataweb Research, Department of Computer Science, University of Valladolid, Escuela Técnica Superior de
Ingeniería Informática (E.T.S.I.I.), Campus Miguel Delibes, Paseo de Belén, número 15, ES-47011, Valladolid,
Spain. E-mail: {jfergar,migumar2}@infor.uva.es

tasks due to the diversity of

Censuses are one of the most relevant types of statistical 
data, allowing analyses of the population in terms of
demography, economy, sociology, and culture. For ﬁnegrained 
analysis, census agencies publish census
microdata that consist of a sample of individual records
of the census containing detailed anonymous individual
information. Working with microdata from different censuses 
and doing comparative studies are currently difﬁcult

formats and
granularities. In this article, we show that novel data
processing techniques can be applied to make census
microdata interoperable and easy to access and
combine. In fact, we demonstrate how Linked Open Data
principles, a set of techniques to publish and make connections 
of (semi-)structured data on the web, can be
fruitfully applied to census microdata. We present a
step-by-step process to achieve this goal and we study,
in theory and practice, two real case studies: the 2001
Spanish census and a general framework for Integrated
Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS-I).

Census Data Dissemination and Open Data

Let us quote in full this reﬂection of the United Nations

Statistics Division (2010):

A census is not considered complete until the collected information 
is made available to users in the form suited to their needs.
Recent decades have witnessed an increasing demand, by census
data users, for a broad range of census products and services.
Each census product, and its media of dissemination, offers
respective advantages and limitations. In most instances, the
various census products and services complement each other and
can provide effective ways to reach out to a wide range of users
in the public and private sectors. With the widespread use

of microcomputers and growing access to the Internet, an
increasing number of data users prefer to obtain census data in
electronic media rather than in printed form. (p. 37)

One of the main challenges in this area is the computational
support to fulﬁll the demands posed by these trends. A recent
survey shows that most countries publish their census results
in electronic media. The preferred media are (in this order):
static website (95%), CD/DVD (80%), geographic information 
systems (GIS) web-based tools (59%), and online database 
(53%) (United Nations Statistics Division, 2010).

From a computational point of view, current web trends
indicate that increasingly people consider that a piece of information 
is “available” or “public” only if it can be obtained
online. This follows technological trends that indicate that
intermediate “artifacts” of information (printed, CD/DVD,
ﬂash memory, etc.) are rapidly becoming obsolete. Our
research work relies on this fact and examines the behavior of
web technologies regarding publication of census microdata.

Microdata

Results of censuses are disseminated via tabulations of
different topics and granularities and also, in many cases, via
microdata samples. The United Nations Statistics Division
(2010) deﬁnes microdata as

the individual records that contain information collected in a
census or survey on the characteristics of each person, household 
and housing unit. A census microdata sample allows
researchers to know, simultaneously, all the personal characteristics 
of every individual in the sample. (p. 39)

Received July 24, 2012; revised October 31, 2012; accepted November 1,
2012

© 2013 ASIS&T • Published online 20 June 2013 in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com). DOI: 10.1002/asi.22876

Statistical organizations have diverse policies regarding the
distribution of basic census information. Usually there is a
standard distribution policy for data for the general public
and specialized, more restricted case-by-case policies for

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 64(9):1802–1814, 2013

providing more ﬁne-grained tabulations for specialized types
of users, such as researchers, policy makers, teachers, and
students.

The restrictions for not having detailed access to census
data as a general policy can be grouped in two areas of
concern. One is the economic costs of processing the data.
Different specialized users hardly need the same views and
the same granularity of data. Thus, elaborating tabulations
that meet special requests (e.g., detailed tabulations, data on
speciﬁc topics and subgroups, etc.) is costly and thus can
only be made for a fee, usually on a cost recovery basis. The
second consideration, closely related to the previous one, is
that of privacy and legal regulations. Different areas and
countries have diverse regulations on this matter. Censuses
have sensitive information about people. Thus, this information 
can be released only under strict privacy and statistical
constraints. For the case of microdata, only samples of the
full records, assuring anonymity, are released.

There is a growing tendency to disseminate census microdata.
 Today 77 countries or areas (59% of a total of 131 in the
study) disseminate census microdata, and Latin America is
the region with the highest percentage of countries that
disseminate microdata (United Nations Statistics Division,
2010). However, these microdata are currently presented in
different formats, structures, and levels of detail that hinders
comparative analysis (Esteve & Sobek, 2003) and do not
stimulate interoperability. The social, economic, and scientiﬁc 
impacts of microdata would increase if they could be
openly available in standard formats for multiple types of
users, agencies, researchers (in a wide range of ﬁelds), and
citizens. Besides, the use of common schemas would allow
microdata to be harmonized across countries and time
periods, enabling comparative analysis. Although there exist
some particular projects to harmonize censuses of different
countries, such as the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series
International (IPUMS-I) (Hall, McCaa, & Thorvaldsen,
2000) and the North Atlantic Population Project,1 they
produce isolated datasets, noninteroperable between them
and not linkable to other sources. Nevertheless, data interoperability 
between countries is a well-known, yet difﬁcult to
solve, problem in almost every area; harmonization of trade
data (Trade and Investment Division, 2012), environmental
information and services (Perego et al., 2012), geospacial
data,2 or data sharing policies ﬁghting against transnational
organized crime3 are just a few examples of standardizing
datasets across governments. One of the latest efforts is the
Interoperability Solutions for European Public Administrations 
program (ISA),4 aimed to foster
interoperability
between public administrations, yet highlighting that “legal
compatibility, semantic interoperability, technical aspects of
information systems, organisational cooperation and a
favourable political climate are all necessary to make interoperable 
public services a reality.” Other efforts, such as the
Guardian’s World Government Data website,5 are aimed at
providing horizontal access
to government catalogs.
However, the catalogs have different standards, limiting
ﬂexibility, reusability, and extensibility as it substantially

increases the required effort for each new catalog addition
(Maali, Cyganiak, & Peristeras, 2010). Semantic interoperability 
addresses this issue, extending the capabilities of
applications on the basis of the collected and harmonized
semantics-aware data structures (Perego et al., 2012).

Semantic Web Technologies Applied to Census Microdata

This article deals with the application of the latest semantic 
web technologies to the publication of census microdata
in order to (a) use a semantic data model that formalizes the
representation while hindering the different levels of detail
(semistructured), (b) link census data with external sources,
and (c) integrate censuses across countries.

Given the early stage of these technologies, their application 
to any particular scenario, as studied in this article,
requires a prior study to establish methodologies and procedures 
for speciﬁc data modeling and processing. Although
semantic web technologies have been applied to related
problems, such as the publication of historical data (MeroñoPeñuela 
et al., 2012) or recent projects on census publication,
such as CEDAR (Dutch census data in a web of global
cultural and historic information),6 there is no previous work,
to the best of our knowledge, outlining the general steps
required for publishing census microdata over the semantic
web infrastructure. It is worth noting that our concern here is
neither the statistical issues of what types of data should be
published, nor the important legal and privacy restrictions
that should apply. Acknowledging that several countries are
already publishing census microdata, we propose to enhance
their publication and consumption by means of semantic web
technologies.

The core of our approach lies in how microdata are structured 
and represented for their publication. Censuses, like
other kinds of statistical or historic information, can be seen
as a number of entities, attributes of these entities, and
relationships between entities. For instance, a census could
describe an individual (“person” entity) who is 40 years old
(“age” attribute) and has one son (relation to another
“person” entity). This can be formalized and effectively
modeled using semantic web technologies.

The choice of an adequate data model is essential to
address the requirements of data processing of a speciﬁc
area. In this article, we follow the standard model for publication 
of semantic data at web scale, namely, the standard
resource description framework (RDF) (Malona & Miller,
2004). RDF has ﬂexibility for handling semistructured information 
(entities with different levels of detail). In summary,
RDF describes entities through triples (subject, predicate,
value), in which the subject is the entity being described, the
predicate is a property applied to it, and the value is the
property value. For instance, (individual #1, age, 40) and
(individual #1, has_son,
individual #2) draw two RDF
triples. This can be seen as a graph of knowledge in which
entities and values are linked via labeled edges, that is, the
predicates are the labels. How these predicates are formally
deﬁned constitutes the second main decision. In our case, an

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—September 2013
DOI: 10.1002/asi

1803

appropriate set of vocabularies must be provided to cover the
diversity of different census semantics. Thus, the original
plain representation of microdata is turned into a rich
semantic graph in which relationships are undoubtedly
understood by people with diverse backgrounds, but also by
automated systems that can easily parse and consume the
census knowledge for different purposes.

Open Publication of Semantic Census Microdata

Once the microdata are semantically described, how this
representation is ﬁnally published on the web constitutes the
second part of our approach. There is today a growing tendency 
toward open data and open access, but making the
data available to increasing groups of people brings several
challenges. Besides the legal and political issues, one of the
most challenging is the issue of the formatting of data.
However, our prior decisions guarantee microdata to be
delivered in a standardized way, opening their publication to
the World Wide Web (WWW) showcase. Nowadays, the
project Linked Open Data7 (LOD) is the reference for exposing 
semantic datasets in the WWW, and its application to
government data has created a new ﬁeld, Linked Open
Government Data8 (LOGD), pushing the interconnection,
openness, modularity, and scalability of government data to
a new dimension. Summarizing (a detailed review is given in
the next section), LOD establishes a set of recommendations
to publish the aforementioned RDF data, encouraging the
establishment of connections between different data sources
on the web (Bizer, Heath, Idehen, & Berners-Lee, 2008). For
instance, a census dataset can include an RDF sentence
(individual #1, born, geoInformation:Madrid), where geo-
Information:Madrid is a link to another dataset (geo-
Information) which expands the information about Madrid.
This simple approach has lifted traditional hyperlinks to a
new level: From a web of isolated pages we are entering the
era of the “web of linked data.”

The fulﬁllment of our approach shows how census microdata 
can take advantage of this web of linked data, but also
how these microdata can also contribute to the globalized
knowledge that it makes available. First, we describe a step-
by-step process proving that it is feasible and advantageous
to develop a general infrastructure to publish microdata
censuses using semantic standards, and this process is then
applied to two real-world case studies:

• The case of the 2001 Spanish Census is an example of how
linked open census microdata can be published using a
bottom-up procedure. That is, the semantic web technologies
are directly applied to the model and the vocabularies originally 
agreed by the Spanish agencies. Microdata published
following this procedure preserve the original agency guidelines,
 but enhances the ﬁnal representation to take advantage
of the semantic web possibilities.

• The IPUMS-I conversion goes a step further and provides a
top-down procedure that allows microdata to be exposed, in a
standardized way, for any potential publisher agency. This
procedure enables census integration across countries and
time periods because it regards the IPUMS-I proposal to

develop a universal vocabulary that harmonizes, over the RDF
data model, the entity properties and relations mostly used in
censuses.

These practical results show that, although the harmonized
approach (IPUMS-I case) is sufﬁciently universal, the LOD
conversion also beneﬁts a particular case such as the Spanish
Census, and it is also a valid strategy for other types of
microdata that are not covered by IPUMS-I (e.g., local censuses,
 sociological surveys).

As a whole, this work shows that there are easy and
feasible solutions to implement conversion processes,
encouraging the adoption of semantic web technologies for
the publication of census microdata in particular, and open
government data in general.

The rest of the article of the paper is organized as follows:
The State of the Art section contextualizes historically
census microdata publication and provides a brief review
about Open Government and Open Data trends, establishing
the path to LOGD and census publication. In the Linked
Open Data Conversion of Census Microdata section, we
detail the semantic web technologies and their relevance in
the LOD principles, showing how census microdata can take
advantage of their adoption. This background is then used
for describing the speciﬁc steps involved in the conversion
process from census microdata to LOD. The Case of the
Spanish Census section reports our ﬁrst case study. We
model the speciﬁc Spanish Census scheme, develop its dedicated 
vocabulary, and build demo applications over the
translated microdata. The RDF Publication of International
Census Microdata section complements this practical experience 
from the perspective of harmonized data. We also set
its data scheme and develop a vocabulary of integrated
census microdata based on the IPUMS-I project. Last but
not least, we provide tools for converting particular instantiations 
of the IPUMS-I to the principles of LOD. Finally, in
Conclusions and Future Work we discuss our ﬁndings and
delineate further developments.

State of the Art

Censuses have had an unquestionable importance
throughout history. As stated by Anderson (1988), “the
census is deeply embedded in American political
life
through myriad apportionment mechanisms; it is also a
crucial maker for American history” (p. 2). This assertion
applies not only to the United States but to almost all countries 
around the globe. The census information and its published 
results are deﬁned by political, social, and technical
reasons, but at the same time the census information is
crucial to makers of world history.

In the following we focus on putting census microdata in

context and gaining insights into LOD publication.

Historical Context of Census Microdata

To give a historical context of census microdata, we
brieﬂy present three different national cases of efforts to

1804

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—September 2013
DOI: 10.1002/asi

integrate and make publicly available census microdata. We
chose the Argentinean Census because it pioneered historic
census microdata publication (contents from 1869 and 1895
were recovered in 1967); the Chinese case because it is an
interesting example of social and demographic politics in
the most populous country in the world (microdata were
published ﬁrst in 1982); and the IPUMS-USA because it
plants the seed of the IPUMS-I project for universal microdata 
harmonization (IPUMS-USA released microdata from
the 1960 census in 1964). For each case we summarize
(following the work of Hall et al. (2000), where the reader
can ﬁnd a more complete review) the practices developed,
the problems encountered in the handling of such volume
data, and how the technology (data storage, processing, and
dissemination), and sociopolitical matters, in some interesting 
way, affected its production and consumption.

Argentina: The ﬁrst national historical census microdata 
(Somoza & Lattes, 1967). In 1967 two Argentine
demographers, Jorge L. Somoza and Alfredo E. Lattes,
completed the ﬁrst national computerized samples of historical 
census microdata. They used punch cards and
worked from manuscripts of
the original enumeration
sheets of the Argentine censuses of 1869 and 1895, producing 
more than 200,000 cases at a cost of just USD
$21,000. Unfortunately, the original tapes were lost and the
punch cards were recycled long ago, leaving just the results
and published work.

Besides this, we know now how Somoza and Lattes made
this remarkable work. For 6 months 12 researchers selected
the samples,
transcribed, coded cases, checked, and
rechecked the cases. The key-pushing process took only 3
months. After the key-pushing and veriﬁcation process, four
researchers spent an additional 6 months in data processing
tasks: dealing with missing data, checking and rechecking
for errors and omissions, computing new national tables,
evaluating results, and drafting documentation.

The entire project was completed October 1, 1967. The
ﬁnal data of 1869 and 1895 censuses were freely published
as ASCII text ﬁles, of three and four megabytes, respectively.
 Their compressed representation ﬁts on a conventional 
ﬂoppy disk.

China: Censuses of 1982 and 1990 (Hall et al., 2000).
China’s history of public use census microdata is quite short,
even though it has the largest population and a long history
of censuses. It was just in the 1982 census that microdata
began to be stored in machine-readable format and made
available for public use. Chinese censuses are considered
national efforts, mobilizing millions of participants.

The 1982 census records were processed by a central
computer center using miniand 
mainframe computers,
while the 1990 census was largely processed with personal
computers. At the ﬁrst stages of the data analysis, the 1990
census used 3,690 PCs. These microdata have not been
made public outside China, with very few exceptions of
collaborative research with foreign institutions.

IPUMS-USA: Integrated Public Use Microdata Series
for the United States (Hall et al., 2000). The U.S. Bureau of

Census made available in 1964 the ﬁrst public use census
microdata sample of the 1960 census. This was the result of
an effort to meet the needs of scholars who increasingly
requested specialized tabulations not included in the published 
census volumes. It was an immediate success even
though its density was quite small, 1-in-1,000 extract, yielding 
about 180,000 person-records. Such data analysis was
not an easy task given the modest computer capacity available 
in 1964. The low density did not help with the analyses
of small population groups, and for privacy matters the
records do not include any geographic information. These
problems were addressed by the 1970 public samples, and a
new 1960 sample was produced with a density of 1-in-100
and with integrated variables that allows cross-analyses
including both censuses. By the late 1970s, the public use
samples for 1960 and 1970 had become essential tools of
American social scientists. The Census Bureau also released
public use samples from the 1940 to 1990 censuses, but
unfortunately, each sample was coded entirely differently
and had separate documentation.

In 1992, the Minnesota Population Center of the University 
of Minnesota started the IPUMS project (Integrated
Public Use Microdata Series) to build a coherent national
database of a high-precision individual-level census data
describing the characteristics of the U.S. population between
1850 and 1990.

Preliminary samples exist for all census years with the
exception of 1890, which was destroyed in a ﬁre, and 1930,
which was unavailable until 2002 for privacy restrictions.
The sample density of the early censuses had to be variable
depending on special-interest population subgroups to
achieve representative sampling (i.e., Black and Indian
population); it was achieved by oversampling strategies. A
key feature of the samples constructed as part of the project
is their harmonization (use of a common coding system for
all variables) to guarantee integration on multiple census
years. An important feature of the IPUMS is the allocation
of missing, illegible, and inconsistent data in all the censuses
from 1850 to 1920 using logical editing and “hot deck”
probabilistic editing.

As a result of the success of the IPUMS project, a new
project, called IPUMS International (IPUMS-I), started in
1999 as an effort to inventory, preserve, integrate, and disseminate 
census microdata around the world. According to
the last activity report (Minnesota Population Center, 2011)
there are 185 fully processed samples of 63 countries into
the IPUMS-I database.

Linked Open Data Publication

The notion of open government can be traced back to the
Enlightenment and its policies toward freedom of the press
advocated by the American and French revolutions (Lathrop
& Ruma, 2010). Nevertheless, freedom of information was
an achievement of the last century, and many countries did
not pass corresponding legislation until
the early 21st
century. For instance, the United States passed its Freedom

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—September 2013
DOI: 10.1002/asi

1805

of Information Act (FOIA) in 1966. This law allows previously 
unreleased information (and documents controlled by
the U.S. government) to be fully or partially disclosed. The
“OPEN Government Act” amended the FOIA in 2007, highlighting,
 among many other changes, the speciﬁc recognition 
of electronic media as a document source. An updated
survey of the current Open Government status was made by
Lathrop and Ruma (2010), who argue that

open government is emerging as a new kind of public sector
organization which opens its doors to the world; co-innovates
with everyone, especially citizens; shares resources that were
previously closely guarded; harnesses the power of mass collaboration;
 drives transparency throughout its operations; and
behaves not as an isolated department or jurisdiction, but as
something new a truly integrated and networked organization.
(p. 16)

Currently, Open Data is one of the most important movements 
within Open Government. It basically relies on the
idea that government data should be publicly available to
enable its reuse by different stakeholders. It is worth noting
that, in the internet era, the same openness that enables
transparency also enables innovation (Lathrop & Ruma,
2010). This philosophy is not exclusive for government data,
and this opening movement is also arising in scenarios
related to libraries, culture, economics, or science (Uhlir &
Schröder, 2007) among others.

Open data and open government movements have been
gaining momentum thanks to initiatives such as the Open
Data Foundation and the Open Knowledge Foundation.9
One of the ﬁrst actions of the newly elected President of the
United States in 2009 was the Open Government Memorandum 
(Obama, 2009), which calls for more transparent, participatory,
 and collaborative government.

The mutual understanding between (linked) open data
and open government initiatives began to be advocated, the
creator of the web, Tim Berners-Lee, being among the ﬁrst
to propose such a program (Berners-Lee, 2009).

LOD is an initiative that proposes to use the WWW to
connect related data that were not previously linked, or use
the WWW technologies to lower the barriers to link data
currently linked using other methods. Linked Data is also
“about employing the Resource Description Framework
(RDF) and the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) to
publish structured data on the Web and to connect data
between different data sources, effectively allowing data in
one data source to be linked to data in another data source”
(Bizer et al., 2008, p. 1265).

Therefore, LOD uses the WWW infrastructure and leverages 
it for publishing and linking any type of data, overcoming 
the traditional uses of linkage restricted to documents
and web pages. Nevertheless, the meaningful interlinking of
this universe of data is challenging (Hausenblas & Karnstedt,
 2010). Currently, it relies on the following four principles 
(Berners-Lee, 2006):
(a) use URIs for naming
resources; (b) use HTTP URIs so that people can look up

those names; (c) provide useful information using standards,
such as RDF and SPARQL (Prud’hommeaux & Seaborne,
2008), when someone looks up a URI; and (d) include links
to other URIs so that
they can discover other related
resources on the web. Behind these technical recommendations 
underlies the idea of releasing data under open
licenses, which permits the reuse and crossing of published
data.

LOD principles of modularity, openness, and scalability
ﬁt with government’s goals of efﬁciency, transparency, and
service to citizens, particularly regarding information. That
is why LOD appears as a natural interconnection bus to ease
access to public-sector data (Bizer, 2009). In fact, the W3C
eGovernment Interest Group and the Government Linked
Data Working Group are starting to work closely with governments 
in highlighting the beneﬁts of LOGD (Alonso,
Novak, & Acar, 2009).

Governments around the world are beginning to understand 
this potential (Bizer, 2009). The U.S. government,
through the Data.gov site, hosts several hundred thousand
datasets offering citizens and developers the possibility of
creating applications from these government data. Its main
research is focused on semiautomatic or low-cost LOGD
conversion (from CSV and other formats) and publication
(Ding et al., 2010). A complete background of Data.gov, as
well as the current and planned use of linked data for organizing 
its knowledge and vocabularies,
is described in
Hendler, Holm, Musialek, and Thomas (2012). The U.K.
government is also making strong efforts in this direction.
Currently there are thousands of datasets at data.gov.uk,
with particular emphasis on Linked Data integration. The
experience of deploying this public data catalog,
its
research challenges, and the lessons for governments and
technical communities can be found in Shadbot et al.
(2012). The U.S. and U.K. Data.gov experiences are among
the most representative examples of LOGD, but this movement 
is growing progressively in numerous countries and
states. By October 2012, 47 countries participated in the
Open Government Partnership initiative10 and 10 more are
ready to join.

In this article,

two strategies have been explored to
make census microdata publicly available using LOD
principles.

The ﬁrst consists of modeling and translating directly the
microdata into a web language such as RDF. An example of
this approach—but for aggregated data—is the 2000 U.S.
Census,11 which is part of the LOD cloud. It comprises
geographical data and detailed population statistics by
region. Note that in this case the original source is aggregated 
data. Developing such conversion for microdata presents 
other types of challenges. The 2001 Spanish Census
conversion to RDF (Fernández, Martínez-Prieto, & Gutiérrez,
 2011) is a good example of employing microdata. These
two cases are examples of bottom-up procedures.

The second strategy is to proceed top-down, that is, to get
a general model that abstracts the common features of different 
censuses and use it to produce particular instances.

1806

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—September 2013
DOI: 10.1002/asi

One of the most comprehensive developments in this direction 
is the work of Integrated Public Use Microdata Series,
International (IPUMS-I) (Hall et al., 2000). The goals of this
project are to inventory machine-readable census microdata,
to preserve census microdata identiﬁed as at risk, to create
an integrated international census database with a harmonized 
system of concepts, and to disseminate integrated
microdata via the web. To the best of our knowledge, there
have been no efforts to integrate this information under
Linked Data principles.

Linked Open Data Conversion of
Census Microdata

As explained in the introduction, the application of these
young technologies to a new problem deserves a study
deﬁning methodologies and procedures for speciﬁc data
modeling and processing. We deﬁne, at the end of this
section, our own step-by-step process for transforming raw
census microdata into LOD. Nevertheless, we ﬁrst analyze
how the speciﬁc census microdata particularities impact the
semantic web infrastructure.

Semantic Microdata Modeling

Although census microdata are gathered in a structured
way and it is traditionally seen as a structured source of
information, this view entails several disadvantages. Let us
consider that a census describes entities (person, family
nucleus, house, etc.), their attributes (age, studies, number of
members in one family, rooms of a house, etc.), and relations
between entities (mother of another person, main person in
a family nucleus, owner of house, etc.). First, each type of
entity is mainly related to different attributes, but repeated
attributes can have a different meaning depending on the
entity (e.g., “structure” of a family differs from “structure”
of a house). Second, entities are described in different levels
of detail and do not usually have a value for all the attributes
(e.g., a census could gather the four previous types of jobs of
every person, but not all the persons would have them).
Finally, each entity can also have different
types and
numbers of relationships (e.g., a relationship between two
houses is rare, and one person can be related to more than
one house or just one). A structured model (such a relational
scheme) could solve “somehow” some of these deﬁciencies,
but others are clearly out of the scope of a structured view
and results in a poor representation (e.g., having several
NULL attributes in the description of a person). Thus, a
ﬂexible semistructured data model better ﬁts these particularities 
of census microdata.

Although the need to capture the semantics by this data
model was already outlined, this becomes a main requirement 
when harmonizing censuses between different periods
or countries. In this case, together with format harmonization,
 the data model has to capture the very different levels
of detail of the entities and relationships and to deal with a
particular meaning of the attributes of each census sample.

In such a scenario the resource description framework
(RDF) (Malona & Miller, 2004) is an ideal candidate because
of its ﬂexibility for representing the semantics of semistructured 
information with entities (resources) with different
levels of detail. It is based on atomic triple units. An RDF
triple is described as a statement of the form (subject, predicate,
 value) in which the subject is the entity (also called
resource) being described, the predicate is a property applied
to it, and the value is the concrete value. For instance,
(registry #2, type, person) and (registry #2, gender, female)
model that the second registry of our census represents a
person and this person is a woman. Note that this type of
semantic representation is supposed to avoid ambiguity in
order to harmonize different collections and, when possible,
to be processed automatically. Thus, “gender,” “sex,” “has-
_gender” are different possibilities that should be harmonized.
 To do so, RDF provides a clear semantic in which
subjects and predicates are modeled with URIs (Uniform
Resource Identiﬁers), so that if two entities use the same
URIs we can assume that they convey the same meaning. This
way, the previous example could be formally written as
and
(http://example.org/registry#2,
(http://example.org/registry#2, foaf:gender, “female”),
in
which rdf: and foaf: are well-known vocabularies providing
standard properties. As can be seen, the correct URI design
for the entities, vocabulary selection, and vocabulary creation
for the attributes (for those properties not found elsewhere),
and the establishments of relationships, are the main cornerstones 
when converting census microdata to RDF.

“Person”)

rdf:type,

A ﬁnal, but no less important, observation refers to the
scalability of this data model when it is applied for modeling
any particular microdata collection. On one hand, when the
data designer builds the vocabulary, it can freely model any
kind of feature and relationship. Note that this URI-based
identiﬁcation enables each predicate in the vocabulary to be
undoubtedly understood by simply de-referencing it. On the
other hand, the labeled graph structure underlying the RDF
model allows new semantics to be easily added in advance.
Let us suppose, for instance, that a new property is recorded
for the “person” entity. In this case, all values for this property 
are stored by adding edges (labeled with the URI identifying 
the new property) from the entity nodes to their
corresponding values.

Semantic Microdata Publication

These important issues must be dealt with by considering
the ﬁnal dissemination target and the potential consumption
of information. As explained, the project LOD is the reference 
for exposing open semantic datasets on the web.

Linked open census microdata refers to providing
census microdata in RDF following the aforementioned
Linked Data principles. The publication of linked open
census microdata provides, therefore, several advantages:
(a) The philosophy makes use of de-referenceable URIs
for each resource so that the information is referenceable
across the web; (b) the statistical variables are also URIs,

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—September 2013
DOI: 10.1002/asi

1807

hence the use of a common vocabulary for harmonized parts
of a census is encouraged; (c) the data and their models can
be easily extended by adding, deleting, or updating RDF
triples (units of information); (d) the use of data standards
provides access to a set of standard tools and the support of
an emerging research community; and (e) census data can be
potentially integrated with noncensus data published under
the Linked Data philosophy.

The latest LOD cloud estimations12 show that more than
30 billion RDF triples are being shared and increasingly
linked. Anyone can publish data on the web of Linked Data,
comprising large self-describing RDF datasets from ﬁelds
such as bioinformatics, social networks, geographic locations,
 ﬁlms, and so on. Thus, millions of entities are connected 
and the open philosophy assures that applications can
discover new data at run-time by following links. Census
data have a great integration potential with other datasets in
the LOD. For instance, from an anonymous individual
census record, external links can be followed to get geographic 
or wiki information on the place of birth (or current
housing), wiki information of events happening in a period
of time referred to in the census record, information about
music, ﬁlms, publications related to the data, and so on. It is
worth mentioning that most of these datasets are already
present in the cloud (such as Geonames, DBpedia, ACM,
and DBLP publications, etc.), whereas others can potentially
be available (we review the state of the art in LOGD publication 
in the previous section).

The Step-by-Step Process

The conversion of census microdata into LOGD is a
process that can be generalized in a series of six steps
leading to the adaptation of the information to the required
form and format. In the next sections we provide two different 
case studies, instantiations, of these steps.

Corpus deﬁnition. Governments might provide several
sources of information in the same microdata ﬁle, or, on the
other hand, they might disseminate samplings in diverse
ways and even formats. Thus, a ﬁrst study must be carried
out to narrow the data to be ﬁnally converted.

Data modeling. The exposed microdata tend to organize
the information by records, that is, one record per person.
However, within each record census information can be
modeled in many ways; other entities could have their own
associated information, such as country regions, buildings,
or family nucleuses. The second phase of the data processing 
is to identify the schema of the data used by the corresponding 
administration, its study, and analysis.

Vocabulary deﬁnition. Data must be converted to a standard 
format, RDF. Then the identiﬁed entities and their
properties (attributes) must be named with a unique URI.
For instance, each anonymous person or building, and each
property, such as age or year of building, should have a URI.

Following the Linked Data principles, these URIs must be
de-referenceable (accessible) via the HTTP protocol. It is
worth mentioning that there exist two standard policies for
entity and property naming: slash URIs and hash URIs
approaches (Sauermann & Cyganiak, 2008). They establish
a common scheme to be followed in the assignment of URIs.

Linked data links. The Linked Data fourth principle
recommends making links elsewhere to connect the data to
conform to a linked data web. Thus, potential out-links, from
the data to well-known datasets, have to be identiﬁed. This
process is particularly peculiar in the case of a census
because of the special entities and properties used. Entities
are anonymous and their IDs respect the original data; thus,
they cannot be present in any other external dataset. The
vocabulary is also domain-dependent, hence the commonalities 
must be identiﬁed in the literal objects. For instance,
geographical terms are a good source of out-links.

Parsing and publication. The process of conversion ends
with the original ﬁle parsing and ﬁnal publication. The original 
ﬁle is parsed, (a) identifying the entities and properties of
the deﬁned data model, (b) converting them to RDF following 
the deﬁned URI scheme, and (c) establishing the identiﬁed 
out-links. The original data may include some errors
and inconsistencies that have to be solved in the parsing
process.

Architecture and services for the citizen. The conversion of
a census into RDF and their links to the web of data offer the
basis for constructing rich applications by the administration
and interested third parties. This opens a wide range of
applications and a new window for disseminating results,
which constitutes one of the main objectives of the census.
Thus, this step is almost required in every conversion process,
although it goes beyond the basic open data publication.

It is worth mentioning that these steps can be also seen as
a particular instantiation of the guidelines provided in
Villazón-Terrazas, Vilches, Corcho, and Gómez-Pérez
(2011). In this work, the authors group some recommendations 
for general government Linked Data publishing, in the
following ﬁve categories: (a) speciﬁcation, including the
analysis of the data sources and the URI design; (b) modeling,
referred mainly to the vocabulary construction; (c) generation
which includes parsing and linking; (d) publication; and (e)
exploitation. As can be seen, we ﬁnd some similarities and
differences. Our ﬁrst step speciﬁcally addresses corpus deﬁnition,
 whereas we share its analysis of data sources, renamed
“data modeling” in our second step. This way, we pay special
attention to the original data study because of the potential
census microdata particularities. We merge the URI design
(in their ﬁrst step) together with its modeling to conform to
our third step, called “vocabulary deﬁnition.” The linking
subprocess of their generation step is upgraded to our dedicated 
four step “Linked Data links” to draw attention to its
importance in the case of a census. Finally, we share the main

1808

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—September 2013
DOI: 10.1002/asi

features of the latest two steps, although we focus exploitation 
speciﬁcally in “Architecture and Services for the
Citizen.”

The Case of the Spanish Census

Since its inception in 1768, the Spanish Census has considered 
the individual as the analysis unit. The latest published
census, in 2001, was designed, primarily, to count the population,
 housing, and buildings. The 2001 Spanish Census was
based on a classical census model, that is, an exhaustive query
of the territory. The total process involved the efforts of more
than 42,500 people. Thirteen million homes, which included a
total population of 40,847,371, were visited in 3 months. The
total budget amounted to 165,278,328€, of which 70% was
addressed to contracting census agents.

The ﬁnal data were published through (a) microdata ﬁles,
(b) population ﬁgures, and (c) a basic query system. Microdata 
are ASCII ﬁles which sample the total data and represent 
each ﬁeld with a ﬁxed-length code. A conversion table
describes each ﬁeld (length/meaning) corresponding to a
statistical variable. The main ﬁle (5% sampling) includes
one register per anonymous individual. Population ﬁgures
summarize the most important results. The data are also
available through a basic query system which allows the user
to construct predeﬁned or new tables on a set of variables.
The publication and accessibility of such data present
several technical drawbacks. An advanced user could construct
only a limited set of queries conditioned by the query system
interface. Third-party applications could use the microdata
ﬁles, but the parsing is neither trivial nor standard. It is difﬁcult
to develop automatic tools that consume such data.

Additionally, from an economic and administrative point
of view, there are also problems. The government is forced
to implement internal processes to provide full access for
local administrations. The common citizen obtains few
direct visible beneﬁts (e.g., a set of visual applications).

In the following we use the 2001 Spanish Census as a
case study to show how these problems can be solved. The
general six-step LOD conversion, presented in the previous
section, is followed; in this case, the original census microdata 
are processed to obtain a high-level semantic model to
be published as LOD.

Corpus Deﬁnition

In this case we focus on the microdata ﬁles of the 2001
Spanish Census concerning the individuals, that is, ASCII
ﬁles with a 5% sampling of the population.

Data Modeling

We identify the statistical data model used by the administration.
 For this purpose, we enrich the online available
documentation with the ﬁle parsing and the study of each
ﬁeld that describes an individual.

The resulting data model is shown in Figure 1. Entities
are represented by circles, their statistical variables within

FIG. 1. Spanish Census data model. [Color ﬁgure can be viewed in the
online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]

rectangles, and the relations between entities through
arrows. As shown, the given information is about people,
homes, houses, family nucleuses, and buildings. The set of
properties of the entities are well described in the documentation.
 These are the ﬁelds completed in the data-gathering
phase of the census. People belong to a unique family
nucleus and a unique home, although that home could house
several families. A home is sited physically in a house
belonging to a building. People can be related through
father, mother, and main person relations, that is, the head of
the family nucleus.

Vocabulary Deﬁnition

The RDF model requires the use of URIs for entities and
properties. We design a URI scheme with a common preﬁx
http://dataweb.infor.uva.es/census2001/censo/2001. Then,
entities are named by adding an appropriate ID to this
common preﬁx; the nomenclature for the IDs of people,
homes, houses, and nucleuses was taken from the identiﬁcation 
of records within the original text ﬁle. In turn, the
attributes of these entities must be converted to a standard
URI representation. As stated, LOD encourages the reuse of
vocabularies, but little effort has been made in census properties 
deﬁnition. Thus, in this case ad-hoc URI properties are
created by adding the original census attribute name to the
aforementioned preﬁx.13

Figure 2 shows a reduced example of census data. Two
persons are present; an individual was born in Chile (predicate 
person#BORN) and links to his mother (predicate

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—September 2013
DOI: 10.1002/asi

1809

FIG. 2. RDF excerpt from the Spanish Census data (URIs have been summed up). [Color ﬁgure can be viewed in the online issue, which is available at
wileyonlinelibrary.com.]

person#MOTHER) who was born in Madrid in 1980. They
belong to the same family nucleus (with one child, predicate
nucleus#NCHILDREN) and the same home, which is structured 
as “One woman with one or more children” (predicate
home#STHOM). The home is sited in a house with two
rooms (predicate house#NROOMS) and the occupants of
the house complain of not having parkland nearby (predicate
house#GREEN). Finally, the house belongs to a building
constructed in 1990 (predicate building#CONST).

As can be shown, the URI scheme for entities follows a
slash URIs approach where the web server answers requests
all these URIs with the URL of a document that represents
the resource (Sauermann & Cyganiak, 2008). The URI
scheme for properties follows a hash URIs approach in
which the ﬁelds are separated from the rest of the URI by a
hash symbol (“#”’) (Sauermann & Cyganiak, 2008). A web
server answers requests for all these URIs with the URL of
the document describing the vocabulary.

It is worth mentioning that the building entities have been
created explicitly in the conversion process and hence their
sequential numbering. Although people ﬁlled in data about
their building, the microdata ﬁles do not include identiﬁcation 
for each building and thus the trace of common neighbors 
is impossible. We have created building entities which
group a type of building with the same features, that is, two
or more individuals agree on the properties of their building.
Note that these commonalities are region-independent, thus

the statistical secrecy is preserved while new valuable information 
is published for future studies.

Additional properties have also been added to link
entities: (a) person#HOME links people and homes, (b)
(c)
person#NUCLEUS links people
home#HOUSE links
(d)
house#BUILDING links houses and buildings. Person
properties relating familial relationship have been redeﬁned
to link directly the URI of the related person, thus saving the
repetition of data.

and nucleuses,
and

homes

and

houses,

This conversion shows that the ﬁnal data model is simple,
intuitive, and expressive. It preserves the original conception
of the census and its properties but adopts RDF and Linked
Data principles as common standards in the web.

Linked Data Links

The accepted values for literal objects are well described
in the original documentation and, as shown in the example
of Figure 2, they are usually strings that are hardly repeated
in other contexts except for the countries, regions, and town
names. These are the candidates for external linkage.

Geographic concepts are referred through GeoNames.14
We create new URIs for countries, regions, and town names,
which act as the properties of the entities. These concepts
link to GeoNames entities (owl:sameAs predicate) whose
URI is constructed with a unique GeoNames Identiﬁer: the

1810

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—September 2013
DOI: 10.1002/asi

geoNameId. The naming convention for geographic URIs
follows the pattern small geo/<code>, in which <code> consists 
of the original code for the country or the region, or the
string concatenation of region and town code for the towns.

SPARQL syntax and some Virtuoso features from the relational 
databases such as the variable renaming AS and the
count function.

Parsing and Publication

The accepted values for the original ﬁelds were encoded
with ﬁxed length integers. In parsing, we substitute each integer
by the corresponding value. In turn, the GeoNames linkage is
performed over the geographical concepts. The ﬁnal RDF ﬁle is
built in N3 format. The total process reports these statistics:
2,039,274 persons, 118,255,550 triples, and 147 predicates.
The size of the resultant dataset exceeds 15 GB.

Architecture and Services for the Citizen

The new publication scheme allows us to construct rich
applications. As an example, a website15 was built on top of the
Spanish Census converted information. RDF information is
included in an RDF store providing a conﬁgurable SPARQL
endpoint to run queries to the census data. Thus, applications
can be built on top of the RDF store and its SPARQL interface
or over other existing applications and demos. This allows users
to have online access to the data, the endpoint, and the applications.
 We chose Virtuoso 6.1.216 to implement the RDF store,
which is built on a relational database.

An example of a real SPARQL user query running on the

system is presented below.

ppl:<http://dataweb.infor.uva.

PREFIX
es/census2001/censo/2001/persona#>
SELECT distinct(?age), count(?a) AS
?es, count(?b) AS ?ex
FROM
census2001/censo/2001>
WHERE{

<http://dataweb.infor.uva.es/

?country

FILTER

rdfs:label

{
?a ppl:NACI ?born .
?born
(?country=“ESPANA”).
?a ppl:EDAD ?age .
}
UNION
{
?b ppl:NACI ?born2 .
?born2 rdfs:label ?country2 FILTER
(?country2!=“ESPANA”).
?b ppl:EDAD ?age .
}

}
ORDER BY ASC (?age)

The query returns the number of Spanish and foreign people
by age in the census data. It makes use of normative

RDF Publication of International
Census Microdata

As shown, the previous case successfully addresses the
open publication challenges of census microdata and their
direct use by third parties. There are other types of uses that
could beneﬁt from a more general approach, particularly the
integration of several censuses across countries and time
periods that have different statistical variables. In this case,
a top-down approach would be more appropriate, that is, to
get a general model that can be instantiated to a particular
case. In this section, based on international census standards,
 we develop a general high-level vocabulary for census
microdata built using Linked Data principles for publishing
data on the web. In this case, speciﬁc data can be instantiated
selecting the desired countries, time-periods, and statistical
variables.

The Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS-I)
(Hall et al., 2000), is one of the biggest international projects
on census microdata, whose goals are (a) to provide readable
census microdata; (b) to preserve census microdatasets identiﬁed 
as at risk; (c) to create an integrated international
census database with a harmonized system of concepts, variables,
 and codes, incorporating both historical and contemporary 
microdata of individuals, households, and dwellings;
and (d) to disseminate integrated microdata via the Internet.
IPUMS-I currently has available 185 samples encompassing
62 countries with a total of 397 million person records
harmonized (McCaa, Ruggles, Sobek, & Thomas, 2011).
We will concentrate on goals (c) and (d) using the LOD
Conversion deﬁned in the Linked Open Data Conversion
of Census Microdata section.

Corpus Deﬁnition

IPUMS-I has recollected and integrated a vast set of
census data from its international partners, the local statistics 
ofﬁces, to shape its census data. These data include
some metadata about each sample, for example, census and
sample characteristics, local ofﬁce identiﬁcation, and variable 
categorization, such as its type (household, demographic,
 education, etc.) and its domain. From this vast
census data integrated by IPUMS-I, we only focus on the
census and variable information that can be linked to external 
RDF datasets.

Data Modeling

The next step is to identify the relations between elements 
to build a common microdata model. Figure 3 shows
a very general representation of the main parts of our model.
This model tries to represent, in RDF format, the IPUMS-I
relations but mainly focuses on creating external links.

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—September 2013
DOI: 10.1002/asi

1811

variable. Household variables are, among others, geography,
economic, utility, or amenity variables. Person variables
could be demographic, fertility-and-mortality, ethnicity-
and-language,
income, migration, or disability
variables.

labor,

Linked Data Links

We include external links to Geonames, which are represented 
as geonames#Code entities, for the country of each
sample and those Variable Domains which indeed have a
geographic location. We also include links to DBpedia,18
represented as dbpedia#Resource for Variable Domains containing 
years. The aim is to point to the DBpedia resource
describing important events occurring in a given year. These
Linked Data out-links are deﬁned in the vocabulary consumed 
by the tool.

As an example of the usefulness of the MIDA vocabulary
we present a simple SPARQL query that asks for the
common census years from Chile and Brazil and obtains the
abstract DBpedia information from returned years. This
dbpedia-owl:abstract information is a summary of international 
events that took place in such years.

<http://purl.org/mida/

PREFIX
mida:
0.1/mida.rdf#>
PREFIX rdf: <http://www.w3.org/1999/
02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#>
SELECT ?year ?abstract
WHERE {

?scl mida:country mida:Chile .
?sbz mida:country mida:Brazil .
?scl mida:sampleYear ?year .
?sbz mida:sampleYear ?year .
?year mida:dbpediaResource ?reso .
?reso dbpedia-
owl:abstract ?abstract .

}

Parsing and Publication

For the generation of the RDF triples, we implemented a
simple Java tool (midafc.jar19). The ﬁrst step is the execution
of a SPARQL query on the MIDA vocabulary to identify the
samples and variables to be downloaded. For instance, we
can select all common integrated person variables between
two censuses of different countries and different years. The
next step is to download the identiﬁed samples and variables
from the IPUMS-I page, as usual. Two ﬁles have to be
downloaded: (a) the codebook, in the Data Documentation
Initiative (DDI) XML format, provides the description of the
samples and variables included in (b) the IPUMS-I “dat”
ﬁle, a plain ﬁle with variables of ﬁxed length. Finally, the
Java tool parses the ﬁles and returns the RDF data, including
the predeﬁned Linked Data out-links.

FIG. 3. MIDA vocabulary overview.

Unlike the Spanish Census case (including several entities),
the only recognized entities in IPUMS-I are Person Records,
Sample, and Countries. Each record groups the information
of a given anonymous person, providing its ﬁelds as a set of
variables. These variables and their description are given
then in the vocabulary deﬁnition.

Vocabulary Deﬁnition

In this step, we focus on creating a general RDF vocabulary 
for the attributes in the IPUMS-I corpus (referred to as
“variables”). Note that the effort of alignment (harmoniza-
tion) of the attributes between censuses and periods has
already been done by IPUMS-I, hence we take advantage of
it to provide a general semantic vocabulary. The resultant set
of URI properties is the microdata vocabulary17 (MIDA). It
is a direct RDF conversion of the variable metadata of the
185 samples encompassing 62 countries integrated to date,
published on the IPUMS-I web page (Hall et al., 2000). The
MIDA vocabulary has a total of 162.068 RDF triples.

Figure 3 shows the main elements of the MIDA vocabulary.
 A Person Record belongs to a Sample and has a set of
variables. Two types of variables are present: (a) discrete
variables that only take a set of possible values, represented
as a Variable Domain in the ﬁgure, and (b) continuous variables 
whose values are not predeﬁned. We represent this
latter by pointing to a Resource in Figure 3.

It is worth mentioning that, because of the integration of
different censuses, not all variables are available on all
samples. This is represented by the mida:available predicate
in Figure 3. Note also that Sample has several more properties 
not included in this ﬁgure, such as census title, census
agency, population universe, enumeration forms, ﬁeld of
work period, or sample design.

The MIDA vocabulary respects the IPUMS-I variable
categorization; a variable could be integrated (available in
more than one sample) or unharmonized (available in just
one sample) and could be a household variable or a person

1812

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—September 2013
DOI: 10.1002/asi

matching information. The SPARQL endpoint runs the
query and the result is converted to the JavaScript Object
Notation20 (JSON). These data are passed through the
Google Visualization API,21 which ﬁnally produces the visualization 
shown to the user, such as pie and bar charts or
maps.

We think that these initial deployments will encourage
administrations to provide the means for their members to
deal with the new Open Government requirements and to
incorporate these technologies into their publication processes.
 In addition, we would like to encourage researchers
in other ﬁelds (law, history, government, etc.) to examine the
potentialities and risks arising in initiatives such as LOGD.
Although the main aim of LOD is developing methods for
data structuring and publication to facilitate the discovery of
related information, it opens the door for malicious individuals 
to harness it for fraudulent data-matching across collections 
in the LOD cloud. Thus, even though personal datamatching 
across databases is a privacy issue ruled by
speciﬁc laws (e.g., United States,22 United Kingdom,23 or
Australia24), more research is needed to address the application 
of these techniques to sensitive data. It is worth noting
that the ﬁrst step of our conversion process allows the
released data to be carefully selected, enabling administrations 
to obfuscate or directly discard sensitive information.
We envision different approaches for future work. We are
currently developing applications to take further advantage
of the semantic data. In particular, a graphical query interface 
would ﬁll the gap between census practitioners and
formal
languages for querying semantic data such as
SPARQL. We are also reﬁning the conversion process, by
semiautomatizing the external link generation, for example,
to automatically recommend links to DBpedia resources or
any dataset in the LOD cloud. We also expect that these
methodologies will become widespread and, hopefully,
more census microdata will be openly available in standards
formats. Then much work could be done in data linking,
reasoning over the semantic data, and automatic consumption 
(summarization of important information, snippets in
web engines, etc.).

Acknowledgments

1110287,

and

Fondecyt

This work was partially funded by MICINN (TIN2009-
14009-C02-02),
Fondecyt
1-110066. The third author was funded by Erasmus Mundus,
the Regional Government of Castilla y León (Spain), and the
European Social Fund. The fourth author was funded by the
University of Valladolid: programme of Mobility Grants for
Researchers (2012).

Endnotes

1. http://www.nappdata.org/napp
2. http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards
3. http://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/organized-crime/lawenforcement.
html

FIG. 4. Visualization ﬂow in the Spanish Census site. [Color ﬁgure can be
viewed in the online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]

Architecture and Services for the Citizen

Generated RDF triples can be published using the same
architecture and services for the citizen presented at the end
of The Case of the Spanish Census section.

Conclusions and Future Work

This article shows that the latest semantic web technologies 
are suitable for formalizing the representation, publication,
 and exploitation of census microdata. The advantages
of such an approach include the ﬂexibility of the data that
allows any user to adapt it to diverse applications for diverse
purposes; the discovery of new relationships among the
data; the accessibility of pieces and views of the data; the
possibility of integrating them with other data; and last but
not least, the possibility of providing simple services for
complex querying, demos, and visualizations.

We have discussed the publication of census microdata
under the principles of LOD, providing a step-by-step
process. We instantiate this process in two case studies; an
ad-hoc conversion of the 2001 Spanish Census and a generalization 
using the IPUMS-I framework. The most important
conclusion here is that—independently of the approach
chosen—the process of publishing LOD for census microdata 
is feasible, simple, and shows immediate advantages. In
the case of a particular census, a speciﬁc schema is developed 
for each given census dataset. It gives ﬂexibility to the
modeling process and allows for including particular local
features of each census data. The harmonized approach sacriﬁces 
ﬂexibility (by forcing using a general model, like the
IPUMS-I) at the cost of gaining interoperability: several
countries and time periods census can be integrated and
converted together.

We also developed visualization demos to show that the
use of the semantic information is easy and extensible. The
visualization ﬂow is represented in Figure 4. It follows a
similar approach to the data-gov demos in Ding et al. (2010).
Once the user accesses the application, the request is redirected 
to the server hosting the appropriate SPARQL query,
that is, each demo has a related query for extracting the

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—September 2013
DOI: 10.1002/asi

1813

4. http://ec.europa.eu/isa/
5. http://www.guardian.co.uk/world-government-data
6. http://ehumanities.nl/ceda_r/
7. http://linkeddata.org/
8. http://logd.tw.rpi.edu/
9. The Open Data Foundation (http://www.opendatafoundation.org/),

the Open Knowledge Foundation (http://okfn.org/)

10. http://www.opengovpartnership.org
11. http://www.rdfabout.com/demo/census
12. http://www4.wiwiss.fu-berlin.de/lodcloud/
13. The Spanish Census ﬁeld descriptions are available at ftp://

www.ine.es/temas/censopv/cen01_ph/disenoreg_ph01.zip

14. http://www.geonames.org
15. http://dataweb.infor.uva.es/census2001
16. http://virtuoso.openlinksw.com
17. http://purl.org/mida/0.1/mida.rdf
18. http://dbpedia.org
19. http://purl.org/mida/0.1/
20. http://www.json.org
21. https://developers.google.com/chart/
22. http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/omb/assets/omb/

inforeg/ﬁnal_guidance_pl100-503.pdf

23. http://www.audit-commission.gov.uk/SiteCollectionDocuments/

Downloads/CodeDMPFinalJuly08.pdf

24. http://www.privacy.gov.au/materials/types/download/8688/6527

References

Alonso, J.M., Novak, K., & Acar, S. (2009). Improving access to government 
through better use of the web. W3C Interest Group Note 12 May
2009. Retrieved from http://www.w3.org/TR/egov-improving/

Anderson, M.J. (1988). The American census: A social history. New Haven:

Yale University Press.

Berners-Lee, T. (2006). Linked data. W3C Design Issues. Retrieved from

http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/LinkedData.html

Berners-Lee, T. (2009). Putting government data online. W3C Design
Issues. Retrieved from http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/GovData.html
Bizer, C. (2009). The emerging web of linked data. IEEE Intelligent

Systems, 24, 87–92.

Bizer, C., Heath, T., Idehen, K., & Berners-Lee, T. (2008). Linked data on
the web. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on World
Wide Web (pp. 1265–1266).

Ding, L., DiFranzo, D., Graves, A., Michaelis, J., Li, X., McGuinness, D.,
& Hendler, J. (2010). TWC data-gov corpus: Incrementally generating
linked government data from data.gov. In Proceedings of the 19th International 
Conference on World Wide Web (WWW) (pp. 1383–1386).

Esteve, A., & Sobek, M. (2003). Challenges and methods of international

census harmonization. Historical Methods, 36(2), 37–41.

Fernández, J.D., Martínez-Prieto, M.A., & Gutiérrez, C. (2011). Publishing
open statistical data: The Spanish census. In Proceedings of the 12th
Annual International Conference on Digital Government Research
(dg.O) (pp. 20–25).

Hall, P., McCaa, R., & Thorvaldsen, G. (2000). Handbook of international
historical microdata for population research. Minneapolis, MN: The
Minnesota Population Center.

Hausenblas, M., & Karnstedt, M. (2010). Understanding linked open data
as a web-scale database. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference 
on Advances in Databases (DBKDA) (pp. 56–61).

Hendler, J., Holm, J., Musialek, C., & Thomas, G. (2012). US government
linked open data: semantic.data.gov. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 27(3),
25–31.

Lathrop, D., & Ruma, L. (Eds.) (2010). Open government: Collaboration,

transparency, and participation in practice. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly.

Maali, F., Cyganiak, R., & Peristeras, V. (2010). Enabling interoperability
of government data catalogues. In Proceedings of the 9th IFIP WG 8.5
International Conference on Electronic Government (EGOV) (pp. 339–
350).

Malona, F., & Miller, E. (2004). RDF primer. W3C Recommendation 10

February 2004. Retrieved from http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-primer/

McCaa, R., Ruggles, S., Sobek, M.L., & Thomas, W. (2011). IPUMS-
International: free, worldwide microdata access now for censuses of 62
countries–80 by 2015. In 58th ISI World Statistics Congress.

Meroño-Peñuela, A., Ashkpour, A., van Erp, M., Mandemakers, K.,
Breure, L., Scharnhorst, A., . . . (2012). Semantic technologies for historical 
research: A survey. Semantic Web Journal [under review].
Retrieved from http://www.semantic-web-journal.net/sites/default/ﬁles/
swj301.pdf

Minnesota Population Center. (2011). Integrated public use microdata
series, international: Version 6.1 [machine-readable database]. Minneapolis,
 MN: University of Minnesota.

Obama, B. (2009). Transparency and open government. Memorandum
for the Heads of Executive Departments and Agencies. Retrieved from
http://www.whitehouse.gov/the_press_ofﬁce/TransparencyandOpen
Government

Perego, A., Fugazza, C., Vaccari, L., Lutz, M., Smits, P., Kanellopoulos, I.,
& Schade, S. (2012). Harmonization and interoperability of EU environmental

information and services. Intelligent Systems IEEE, 27(3),
pp. 33–39.

Prud’hommeaux, E., & Seaborne, A. (2008). SPARQL query language for
RDF. W3C Recommendation 15 January 2008. Retrieved from http://
www.w3.org/TR/rdf-sparql-query/

Sauermann, L., & Cyganiak, R. (2008). Cool URIs for the semantic web.
W3C Interest Group Note. Retrieved from http://www.w3.org/TR/
cooluris/

Shadbot, N., O’Hara, K., Berners-Lee, T., Gibbins, N., Glaser, H., Hall, W.,
& Schraefel, M.C. (2012). Linked open government data: Lessons from
′′Data.gov.uk. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 27(3), 16–24.

Somoza, J.L., & Lattes, A.E. (1967). Muestras de los dos primeros censos
nacionales de población, 1869 y 1895. Buenos Aires, Argentina: Instituto
Torcuato Di Tella, Centro de Investigaciones Sociales, Documento de
Trabajo no 46.

Trade and Investment Division. (2012). Data harmonization and modelling
guide for single window environment. Economic and Social Commission
for Asia and the Paciﬁc (ESCAP), ST/ESCAP/2619. Retrieved from
http://www.unescap.org/tid/publication/tipub2619.pdf

Uhlir, P., & Schröder, P. (2007). Open data for global science. Data Science

Journal, 6, 36–53.

United Nations Statistics Division. (2010). Report on the results of a survey
on census methods used by countries in the 2010 census round. Working
Paper: UNSD/DSSB/1. Retrieved from http://unstats.un.org/unsd/
demographic/sources/census/2010_phc/docs/ReportOnSurvey
For2010Census.pdf

Villazón-Terrazas, B., Vilches, L.M., Corcho, O., & Gómez-Pérez, A.
(2011). Methodological guidelines for publishing government linked
data. In D. Wood (Ed.), Linking government data (pp. 27–49). New York:
Springer.

1814

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—September 2013
DOI: 10.1002/asi

