The Map Generator Tool(cid:63)

Valeria Fionda1, Giuseppe Pirrò2, Claudio Gutierrez3,

1 Department of Mathematics, University of Calabria, Italy

2 WeST, University of Koblenz-Landau, Germany

3 DCC, Universidad de Chile, Chile

Abstract. We present the MaGe system, which helps users and developers 
to build maps of the Web graph. Maps abstract and represent in a
concise and machine-readable way regions of information on the Web.

Introduction

1
The Web is a large and interconnected information space (usually modeled as
a graph) commonly accessed and explored via navigation enabled by browsers.
To cope with the size of this huge (cyber)space, Web users need to track, record
and specify conceptual regions on the Web (e.g., a set of Web pages; friends
and their interests; a network of citations), for their own use, for exchanging, for
further processing. Users often navigate large fragments of the Web, to discover
and isolate very few resources of interest and struggle to keep connectivity information 
among them. The idea of a map of a Web region is essentially that of
representing in a concise way information in the region in terms of connectivity
among a set of distinguished resources (nodes).

Fig. 1. Building maps of the Web.

With the advent of the Web of Data [4], maps to describe and navigate information 
on the Web in a machine-processable way become more feasible. The key
new technical support is: (i) the availability of a standard infrastructure, based
on the Resource Description Framework (RDF), for the publishing/interlinking
of structured data on the Web; (ii) a community of developers; (iii) languages
to specify regions of information on the Web [1]. Fig. 1 sketches the high level
process of building maps of the Web via the Map Generator (MaGe) system.
(cid:63) V. Fionda was supported by the European Commission, the European Social Fund

and the Calabria region.

Web of  Linked DataRegion of informationMapConceptual SpecificationAbstraction2 The Map framework

The idea of a map on the Web is to represent in a concise and comprehensive
way connectivity information between pairs of distinguished nodes. Given a conceptual 
region G of information on the Web, there can be several maps of G
with diﬀerent level of detail (i.e., nodes and edges to be included).

Formally, let Γ = (VΓ , EΓ ) be a Web region, where VΓ and EΓ are the set

of nodes and edges respectively. Then:
• u → v denotes an edge (u, v) ∈ E.
• u (cid:16) v denotes a path from u to v in Γ .
• Let N ⊆ V . Then, u(cid:16)N v if and only if there is a path from u to v in Γ not

passing through intermediate nodes in N.

Let VM ⊆ V be the set of distinguished nodes of the Web region Γ = (VΓ , EΓ ),
i.e., those that we would like to represent.
Deﬁnition 1 (Map) A map M = (VM , EM ) of Γ = (VΓ , EΓ ) is a graph such
that VM ⊆ VΓ and each edge (x, y) ∈ EM implies x (cid:16) y in Γ .
A basic (and highly used) example of map of the Web are bookmarks. In this
case, VM is the set of nodes highlighted or marked, and EM = ∅, that is, there
is no connectivity recorded among them. An important idea is that of a good
map, i.e., a map which represents connectivity among the distinguished nodes
and avoids redundant edges [3].
Deﬁnition 2 (Good map) A map M = (VM , EM ) of Γ = (VΓ , EΓ ) is good if
and only if:
1. ∀x, y ∈ VM x (cid:16)VM y in Γ implies x → y in M
2. ∀x, y ∈ VM x → y in M implies x (cid:16)VM y in Γ .
Good maps have the nice properties (i) uniqueness and (ii) low complexity of
computation. Indeed, given a region Γ = (VΓ , EΓ ) and a set of distinguished
nodes VM ⊆ VΓ there exists a unique good map M = (VM , EM ) that is computable 
in O(|VM|× (|VΓ \ VM| +|EΓ|)) by an adaptation of the BFS algorithm.

3 MaGe: Building Maps of the Web
Maps are built on top of regions of information on the Web. To automate the
process of generating regions, MaGe uses the NautiLOD [1,2] language. Given
an expression ex, NautiLOD enables to extract a Web region Γ = (VΓ , EΓ )
such that VΓ and EΓ are the set of nodes and edges visited while evaluating ex.
Once the region has been obtained, MaGe computes good maps as sketched in
Section 2 considering the set of distinguished nodes VM = {s} ∪ T , where s is
the node in the region that corresponds to the seed URI where the evaluation of
ex starts and T are the nodes satisfying ex.

MaGe has been implemented in Java and is available for download4. It includes 
two main modules: the selection and the abstraction modules. The ﬁrst
4 The MaGe website: http://mapsforweb.wordpress.com

Fig. 2. The GUI of the MaGe tool.

one is responsible for the implementation of the NautiLOD language. In particular,
 given a seed URI and an expression, this module retrieves a Web region
and a set of distinguished nodes. The second module, given the Web region and
the set of distinguished nodes leverages the map framework to build maps. The
decoupling between selection and abstraction enables to use the two functionalities 
also separately. MaGe is endowed with a GUI, which is shown in Fig. 2. It
includes four main tabs. The ﬁrst one (Fig. 2 (b)) is used to specify the region via
a NautiLOD expression. The second and fourth display the region retrieved in
RDF and the expression endpoints, respectively. The third tab (Fig. 2 (a)) deals
with the creation of maps and their visualization. Both regions and maps can be
saved in RDF allowing their storage, sharing, reuse and exchange. We now provide 
an example that we plan to show (along with others) in the demo. A video
explaining how to use the tool is available at http://youtu.be/BsvAiX3n968.
Maps of Inﬂuence. An inﬂuence network is a graph where nodes are persons 
and edges represent inﬂuence relations. We leverage information taken from
dbpedia.org and the property dbpprop:influenced.
Example 3 Build a map of a region containing people that have inﬂuenced, or
have been inﬂuenced by Stanley Kubrick (SK) up to distance 6. The distinguished
nodes must be scientists.
The region can be speciﬁed via the following NautiLOD expression. Here, the
URI of SK in DBpedia (dbpedia:Stanley_Kubrick) is used as seed node:

dbpprop:influenced<1-6>[ASK {?p rdf:type dbpedia:Scientist.}]

In the expression, the notation <1-6> is a shorthand for the concatenation of
(up to) six steps of the predicate dbpprop:influenced, while the ASK query in
the test [ ] is used to ﬁlter the distinguished nodes (i.e., scientists).

Speciﬁcation of the RegionVisualizationControlMap Creation(a)RegionSpeciﬁcation(b)VisualizationControlFig. 3. Region (f) and good map (a) for SK with some zooms (b)-(e).

Fig. 3 (f) reports the region associated to the inﬂuence network of SK. The
region contains 2981 nodes and 7893 edges. Indeed, it is very diﬃcult to identify
the distinguished nodes and more importantly connectivity among them and
with the seed node. Fig. 3 (a)-(e) show the good map of this region (109 nodes;
2629 edges). The abstraction provided by the good map enables to identify the
inﬂuence path, for instance, between SK and C. Segan (Fig. 3 (e)).

4 Conclusions

The availability of machine-processable information at a Web scale opens new
perspectives toward the development of systems for the harnessing of knowledge
on the Web. We contend that maps, key devices in helping human navigation
in information spaces, are also meaningful on the Web space. They are useful
navigation cues and powerful ways of conveying complex information via concise
representations. Eﬀectively, they play the role of navigational charts, that is,
tools that provide users with abstractions of regions of information on the Web.
We have implemented the MaGE system to generate maps. During the demo we
will show maps in diﬀerent domains including bibliographic networks.

References

1. V. Fionda, C. Gutierrez, and G. Pirrò. Extracting Relevant Subgraphs from Graph

Navigation. In ISWC (Posters & Demos), 2012.

2. V. Fionda, C. Gutierrez, and G. Pirrò. Semantic Navigation on the Web of Data:

Speciﬁcation of Routes, Web Fragments and Actions. In WWW, 2012.

3. V. Fionda, C. Gutierrez, and G. Pirrò. Knowledge Maps of Web Graphs. In KR,

4. T. Heath and C. Bizer. Linked Data: Evolving the Web into a Global Data Space.

2014.

Morgan & Claypool, 2011.

Ernst Wilhelm von BruckeSándor FerencziGood Map S. Kubrick(a)(b)(c)(d)(e)RegionStanley Kubrick(f)S. KubrickC. SaganS. Kubrickending nodestarting node