Eurographics Workshop on 3D Object Retrieval (2015)
I. Pratikakis, M. Spagnuolo, T. Theoharis, L. Van Gool, and R. Veltkamp (Editors)

SHREC’15 Track: Scalability of Non-Rigid 3D Shape

Retrieval

I. Sipiran†1, B. Bustos†2, T. Schreck†1, A. Bronstein3, M. Bronstein4, U. Castellani5, S. Choi6,

L. Lai7, H. Li7, R. Litman3, L. Sun7

1Department of Computer and Information Sciences, University of Konstanz

2Department of Computer Science, University of Chile, 3School of Electrical Engineering, Tel-Aviv University

4Faculty of Informatics, University of Lugano, 5Department of Computer Science, University of Verona

6Department of Biomedical Engineering, Seoul National University, 7Beijing Technology and Business University

Abstract

Due to recent advances in 3D acquisition and modeling, increasingly large amounts of 3D shape data become
available in many application domains. This rises not only the need for effective methods for 3D shape retrieval,
but also efﬁcient retrieval and robust implementations. Previous 3D retrieval challenges have mainly considered
data sets in the range of a few thousands of queries. In the 2015 SHREC track on Scalability of 3D Shape Retrieval
we provide a benchmark with more than 96 thousand shapes. The data set is based on a non-rigid retrieval
benchmark enhanced by other existing shape benchmarks. From the baseline models, a large set of partial objects
were automatically created by simulating a range-image acquisition process. Four teams have participated in
the track, with most methods providing very good to near-perfect retrieval results, and one less complex baseline
method providing fair performance. Timing results indicate that three of the methods including the latter baseline
one provide nearinteractive 
time query execution. Generally, the cost of data pre-processing varies depending
on the method.

Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS):
Generation—Line and curve generation

I.3.3 [Computer Graphics]: Picture/Image

1. Introduction

The experimental comparison of shape retrieval methods is
important for the improvement of existing and the design of
novel methods in this area. Regularly, experimental comparisons 
are carried out as part of the evaluation in technical
publications, as well as the SHREC shape retrieval evaluation 
efforts. So far, shape retrieval evaluation has typically
considered data sets of moderate size up to thousands of objects.
 For example, the dataset proposed in [LLL∗14a] consisted 
of thousands of query and target objects, including
3D models and user queries. There, a large number of user
query sketches was obtained previously by a crowd-sourced
approach.

Considering scalable 3D retrieval is a relevant endeavor,

† Track organizers.

c The Eurographics Association 2015.

as some 3D repositories like Sketchup 3D Warehouse [Ske]
or TurboSquid [Tur] today comprise tens of thousands of
shapes. Also, it can be expected that with increased availability 
of 3D acquisition facilities including crowd-based photogrammetric 
methods [GAF∗10], or consumer-type sensors 
like Microsoft Kinect, large-scale shape retrieval will
become important. Scalable approaches should provide efﬁcient 
similarity computation and ranking, to answer user
queries interactively. Also, and as a pragmatic aspect, scalable 
methods should work also robustly in a fault-tolerant
way regarding outlying and degenerate models, as may be
encountered when studying large-scale 3D repositories. The
provision of large-scale retrieval benchmarks has recently
been limited by availability of real data, which often is expensive 
to obtain.

In this track, we increase the number of query objects by
an order of magnitude. Our benchmark is based on a set of

