Supporting Collaborative Decision Making

in Geo-Collaboration Scenarios

Nelson Baloian1(✉), Jonathan Frez2, José A. Pino1, and Gustavo Zurita3
1 Department of Computer Science, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile

{nbaloian,jpino}@dcc.uchile.cl
2 Universidad Diego Portales, Santiago, Chile

jonathan.frez@mail.udp.cl

3 Management Control and Information Systems Department, Faculty of Economics

and Business, Universidad de Chile, Diagonal Paraguay 257, Santiago, Chile

gzurita@fen.uchile.cl

Abstract.  The Geo-collaboration term is applied to collaborative activities in
which data and models used by participants are strongly related to geographical
locations. There are many scenarios in which Geo-collaboration is used to support
a collaborative decision making process. Some of these scenarios are city plan‐
ning, developing evacuations for emergencies, and developing nature protecting
projects. In these situations experts with various backgrounds and knowledge
contribute with their opinions and viewpoints. Ideally, the ﬁnal solution should
combine all these viewpoints and all specialists should agree on it. Although the
literature  reports  about  procedures  for  combining  decision  makers’  opinions
whose goals might be in contradiction, there are no systems which explicitly
support them to reach consensus over a ﬁnal joint solution. We present a tool
which supports this process by allowing experts ﬁrst, to propose their individual
point of view, modeled in the form of beliefs according to the Dempster-Schafer
evidence theory. Then, the tool lets participants visualize all proposals, discussing
and combining them in a suitable consensual way.

Keywords: Geo-Collaboration · Collaborative decision making

1

Introduction

According  to  Kraemer  and  King  [1],  computer  support  for  Collaborative  Decision
Making refers to systems which facilitate ﬁnding a solution to ill-structured problems
by a team of decision makers. There are many scenarios where the decision making
(DM) outcome strongly depends on geo-referenced information like city planning [2],
crisis management [3], disaster management and recovery [4] natural resources manage‐
ment [5]. These kinds of decision making processes have often been called Spatial
Decision Making and computer systems providing support for these activities typically
include tools for input, storage and retrieval, manipulation, analysis and visualization
of spatial data, including maps. Thus, Geographic Information Systems (GIS) are often
considered as decision support systems involving the integration of spatially referenced

© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
N. Baloian et al. (Eds.): CRIWG 2015, LNCS 9334, pp. 63–71, 2015.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-22747-4_5

64

N. Baloian et al.

data in a problem solving environment [6]. The literature shows that the participation
of various experts is required in many spatial decision-making scenarios [7]. The combi‐
nation of Collaborative Decision Making with Spatial Decision Making has been called
Geo-Collaboration [8, 9].

One of the most recurrent problems can be generally stated in the following way:
Find a suitable area to “do” something. For example: Ghayoumian et al. [5] explain
how to ﬁnd speciﬁc locations for constructing artiﬁcial water recharge aquifers using
ﬂoods. In this example decision makers must be experts in aquifer recharge, but they
will need historical information and spatial data to design a formula which reﬂects the
right criteria for selecting the suitable area(s). This formula is used to build a suitability
map using a GIS. This map typically shows the suitability level on each point of the map
satisfying  the  requirements.  However,  in  ill-structured  problems  this  criterion  is
complex to build because the goals are not clear and the various decision makers will
tend to deﬁne diﬀerent goals according to their own knowledge. The most common
technique to combine the various experts’ points of views in special decision making
scenarios has been the Multi Criteria Decision Analysis approach [7]. Simply stated, it
consists of combining the various criteria which decision makers think should be consid‐
ered to evaluate the suitability of a certain option in a single objective function; there
are many works centered on mathematical structure and how to combine the various
attributes in order to represent the various criteria which should be included in the
scenario evaluation [10]. On the contrary, the problem of supporting the various decision
makers to reach consensus about which important criteria should be considered to build
the suitability map in a geo-collaboration decision making scenario seems to have been
neglected according to the literature. However, it should be noted support for reaching
consensus has been a relevant subject for researchers working in collaborative decision
making in general (not particularly in geo-collaboration). Many authors highlight the
importance  of  reaching  consensus  through  argumentation  in  successive  divergent
(generating options) and convergent stages (grouping, discarding, selecting best options)
of the discussion [11].

Some authors consider GIS as Decision Support Systems because they are intended
to support some stage of the decision making process [12]. However, others argue that
according  to  GIS [2]  oﬀer  in  general  appropriate  techniques  for  data  management,
information extraction, routine manipulation, and visualization, but they do not have the
necessary analytical capabilities to manage a decision making process. Furthermore,
Malafant et al. [12] claim that at the time of publication (2010) of that paper, the existing
Spatial-DSS does not provide the needed characteristics; recent literature does not show
progress in this issue either. According to Nyerges [16, 17, 18] the most needed char‐
acteristics to support spatial ill-structured problems are:
• Combine data from diﬀerent sources, providing degrees of certainty of each and a

method to evaluate and combine data.

• Generate suitability scenarios using various hypothesis in a ﬂexible and systematic

process.

• Oﬀer suitable tools to compare diﬀerent scenarios. The comparison of two or more

scenarios can provide the best solution to the problem and further information.

Supporting Collaborative Decision Making

65

In this paper we propose a method and a tool intended to explicitly support discussion
about scenarios and hypothesis using collaborative software based on decision support
techniques.

2 Related Work

Many models have been proposed, both for individual and collaborative decision making
processes encompassing several points of view, for various purposes, which have been used
to design software tools supporting the process. The most important ones are presented by
Antunes et al. [2]. From all these models we can distill a simplified one which has these
critical  stages:  (1)  Identifying  the  problem, (2)  identifying and  modeling the decision
objective(s),  (3)  collecting,  generating  and/or  combining  data  to  generate  alternative
scenarios, (4) evaluating options according to stated objectives, (5) choosing an option and
conducting a sensitivity analysis. If the decision makers estimate there is enough informa‐
tion, the process ends up with a final decision, otherwise the flow goes back to the identi‐
fying objectives stage or to the generating options stage. Like Artificial Intelligence, the
boundaries for defining what falls under Decision Support Systems (DSS) seem to be
diffuse. However, most authors who have tried to define them agree that one of the most
important characteristics is that human judgment remains in the decision making process
cycle as a key actor, generating alternatives, re-defining and re-modeling objectives since
this is a task involving creativity, which cannot be mechanized. Computers, in turn, can
help  humans  in  gathering  data,  generating  various  decision  options,  evaluating  their
outcome  according  to  the  decisions  goals,  visualizing  these  results  and  sharing  them,
providing suitable tools to support discussion and exchange opinions.

Frequently, DSS deal with ill-structured problems; this means that the goals might
not be totally clear and/or there is insuﬃcient information to solve the problems in a
certain optimal way. Moreover, in ill-structured problems there are many stakeholders
and many decision makers, so the solution tends to be subjective and unique. Also DSS
systems use various models and analysis techniques and are intended to be used by noncomputer 
experts. Hence, a DSS must be interactive, ﬂexible and adaptable in order to
support diﬀerent solution approaches. Furthermore, DSSs oriented to spatial problems
must be able to model the environment and evaluate the impact of changes under various
hypotheses. Also, spatial information is inherently fuzzy and uncertain [2], this implies
that fuzzy analysis techniques are needed.

From the available literature about GIS used to support DM, we note there are many
modelling tools available, which can generate a certain scenario for a geo-graphical area
applying certain evaluation functions and showing the output, e.g., for vegetation winter
survival [3], wind farms locations [4] or forest production estima-tion [5]. However,
most existing GIS are not explicitly designed to support a DM cycle. Moreover, the
process of generating various alternative scenarios according to various criteria and
comparing them is in most cases, a diﬃcult and time consuming task. In order to imple‐
ment a DM process we need to abstract the modelling part from the DM cycle and allow
the decision maker to generate multiple scenarios under various hypotheses and compare
the outcomes in a simple and systematic way.

66

N. Baloian et al.

A decision making process supported by GIS typically starts with two inputs: data
and expert knowledge. Models are built using experts’ knowledge and alternative scenarios 
are constructed using diﬀerent data inputs. These scenarios can be compared
because they are based on the same model; however the model is based on diﬀerent
expert knowledge. This knowledge can change, e.g., by including or removing a person
in the experts team. If the knowledge changes, it is hard to represent this change in the
model; it is even harder to compare the corresponding results.

3 Scenario Building

A speciﬁc scenario consisting of a group of experts analyzing high-risk areas during
earthquakes in a certain city will be used to better explain the requirements for a system
supporting  the  previous  works.  The  experts  have  varied  expertise  knowledge,  and
consequently, they can classify the danger a certain zone may pose on its inhabitants
according to various criteria, e.g., an engineer will evaluate a zone according to the risks
due to construction quality, while another expert will wonder on the possibility of having
traﬃc jams during an earthquake. Someone with a healthcare background can evaluate
the danger in hospitals and clinics and so on.

In the earthquake scenario, the evacuation and/or rescue problem can be classiﬁed
as an ill-problem, because there is no precise information about the number of people
to be evacuated or the time this operation will take. An earthquake can occur at any time
and the population in the areas also change on a time basis.

We have chosen the Belief Theory of Dempster-Schafer [13] as a theoretical support
because it has been successfully used to support decision making when available data
is  incomplete  and/or  uncertain.  The  theory  states  that  multiple  hypotheses  can  be
proposed assigning a certain mass to a geographical area as a percentage of credibility
that the hypotheses are true (belief), e.g., that there will be a certain number of persons
in  that  area  during  an  emergency  by  multiple  experts.  Then  these  hypotheses  are
processed generating belief and plausibility values for the whole area. These values
correspond to the certainty that a hypothesis holds (belief) and the highest chance for
this (plausibility). Thus time and belief based scenarios can provide suitable input to
decision making when there is uncertain incomplete information, and complex modeling
is needed.

We can build a set of Dempster-Shafer hypotheses which can tell us where people
can be located. After a strong earthquake, several city services may fail, e.g., telecom‐
munications, transportation, water supply, electricity. During the early stages of disaster
recovery, the resources must be focused on saving lives. However, the main problem at
this point is locating the places with the largest number of people in danger. Without
telecommunication services this is a strong challenge, full of confusing information
provided by multiple sources. In order to identify the “hotspots” (most probable loca‐
tions where large amount of people in danger may be located), a risk map must be
previously developed. Moreover, an earthquake can occur at any moment and the risk
map is time dependent.

Supporting Collaborative Decision Making

67

Multiple experts should contribute with their knowledge in order to develop useful
risk maps; also multiples sources of information are usually needed. An evacuation plan
for  daytime,  e.g.,  needs  data  from  schools,  hospitals  and  commercial  centers.  We
propose a risk map developing methodology and tool supporting multiple experts’ inter‐
actions, multiples sources validation and several scenarios manipulation. The resulting
suitability map should be the result of the discussion about the plausibility of each
scenario including the experts’ hypotheses, known information about the area, and rele‐
vant factors that must be considered. However the ﬁnal result depends on the combina‐
tion methods [14].

4 Methodology

The methodology deﬁnes two roles and ﬁve stages. The normal user is the expert, who
is someone with speciﬁc knowledge about data inﬂuencing the risk factor of a certain
area, e.g., she/he knows about schools infrastructure, healthcare facilities, transportation
networks or roads infrastructure, etc. Among the experts, one of them should play the
role of coordinator who should be someone with a general knowledge of the area to be
analyzed for risks; she/he is responsible for data validation, merging the viewpoints, and
risk map quality. The ﬁve generic stages are: Data Gathering, Data Validation, Diver‐
gence, Argumentation and Convergence. The proposed tool supports the last three stages
but the description of the ﬁrst two is necessary to understand the worth of this tool.
Data Gathering:  Each expert provides geo-referenced data of the area, related to her/
his own expertise. It is important that no information is provided which is not backed
by an expert. The coordinator can also provide information.
Data Validation:  The coordinator must organize the geo-referenced data into groups
of expertise or topics. Afterwards, the coordinator assigns one or more experts to each
group. Each expert must analyze the data and validate, correct or reject it.
Divergence:  At this stage, each expert, including the coordinator, generates scenarios
which can be private or public. Scenarios can be compared, combined or discarded. The
result of this stage will be a set of multiple scenarios. Each scenario can be based on the
knowledge of one or more experts as a result of the combinations [14].
Argumentation:  During this stage, experts argue about the plausibility of the scenarios
supporting the initial hypotheses using the validated data. They can also compare and
merge them performing various operations like adding, subtracting correlating and/or
calculating average values for the belief and plausibility values the various maps show.
Convergence:  At this stage experts should agree on a single or a reduced set of risk
maps. For this purpose, the coordinator can deﬁne convergence criteria, e.g., 70 % of
correlation between two scenarios allows summing or averaging them into one. After
considering all possible scenarios, the resulting set can be considered as an independent
group of decision support map. However, the entire group must select the most relevant

68

N. Baloian et al.

ones based on their argumentation. The ﬁnal result can be considered as a minimal shared
independent set of decision support maps.

We do not consider that these stages should be exactly followed in this order, espe‐
cially for the last three ones, which are the ones explicitly supported by the tool. We
consider that experts will go back and forth generating scenarios, presenting them to
their colleagues and discussing them trying to reach consensus.
5 Tool Implementation

Based on the methodology described above we propose a tool which allows the construc‐
tion, discussion and combination of suitability maps. The tool supports Divergence,
Argumentation and Convergence with three diﬀerent views. During the Divergence
stage each expert creates one or more risk scenarios. A scenario is deﬁned by the problem
characteristics and the information an expert has in order to support her/his hypotheses,
e.g., a school can be considered an object that can be used for applying a hypothesis like
this: “The risk in schools during an earthquake is 50 % in the morning and 75 % in
cinemas in the evening and weekends”. The tool extends the theory assuming that the
risk mass decreases with the distance to the source location (cinemas and  schools)
according to a model speciﬁed by the expert. Another extension to the theory imple‐
mented by the tool is the relation between elements (facilities) and the hypothesis, which
is modeled by so called rules: e.g., if the facility is located near a lake the risk mass
should not be propagated to the water surface.

The expert selects the spatial propagation model, the hypotheses to be supported and
the model interactions when deﬁning a new risk scenario in the divergence stage. The
tool then generates a risk map showing the risk areas according to the deﬁned rules and
hypotheses. The corresponding tool user interface is shown in Fig. 1. Each generated
map will be associated to a private space belonging to the expert. The platform provides
a public space to share interesting scenarios to other experts to sup-port collaborative
work. A shared scenario is visible to all experts and discussion begins. The tool provides
a view where each public map can be annotated, commented and voted to promote
discussion about the suitability of the proposed risk map (Fig. 2). Therefore, the discus‐
sion is supported by an appropriate context [15].

Once a map is made public it can be included by other experts in their private space
making a copy of it for further processing. Moreover, the platform provides tools to
compare and combine private and public scenarios (Fig. 3). These tools are called oper‐
ators. The implemented operators are:
• SUM:  Calculates  the  sum  of  belief  values  for  each  common  cell  between  two

scenarios into the same cell in a new scenario.

• SUB: Calculates the diﬀerence of belief values for each common cell between two

scenarios into the same cell in a new scenario.

• AVG: Calculates the average of belief values for each common cell between two

scenarios into the same cell in a new scenario.

• CORR: Calculates the correlation of all belief values between two scenarios and

returns the value and the SUB of the scenarios.

Supporting Collaborative Decision Making

69

Fig. 1. The view supporting the “divergence” stage of the decision making process

Fig. 2. The view supporting the “argumentation” stage of the decision making process

At the convergence stage the combination of scenarios can be done by the coordinator
using the previous interface. After combining the possible scenarios, the resulting set
will be an independent group of decision support maps. The experts can again use the
argumentation view of the tool selecting one or more as an output of the full process. In
order to support this step the platform provides an argument visualization combining
the scenario visualization and voting system.

70

N. Baloian et al.

Fig. 3. The view supporting the “convergence” stage of the decision making process

6 Conclusions

We have presented a methodology and tool for supporting collaborative decision making
processes for scenarios where suitability maps should be built combining the knowledge
of various experts. We have used a concrete example for explaining the usage of the
tool but it can be applied to a large range of scenarios. The main contribution of this
work is to explicitly introduce collaborative decision making procedures to the construc‐
tion of suitability maps, which has been an unexploited niche as expressed by other
authors [12]. Currently the system is being evaluated by the Chilean Police Department
in order to generate criminal risk maps.

References

1. Kraemer, K.L., King, J.L.: Computer-based systems for cooperative work and group decision

making. ACM Comput. Surv. 20(2), 115–146 (1988)

2. Antunes, P., Sapateiro, C., Zurita, G., Baloian, N.: Integrating spatial data and decision models
in an e-planning tool. In: Kolfschoten, G., Herrmann, T., Lukosch, S. (eds.) CRIWG 2010.
LNCS, vol. 6257, pp. 97–112. Springer, Heidelberg (2010)

3. Cai, G.: Extending distributed GIS to support geo-collaborative crisis management. Geogr.

Inf. Sci. 11(1), 4–14 (2005)

4. Huggins,  L.J.:  Comprehensive  disaster  management  and  development:  the  role  of
geoinformatics  and  geo-collaboration  in  linking  mitigation  and  disaster  recovery  in  the
eastern caribbean. ProQuest (2007)

Supporting Collaborative Decision Making

71

5. Ghayoumian, J., Ghermezcheshme, B., Feiznia, S., Noroozi, A.A.: Integrating GIS and DSS
for identiﬁcation of suitable areas for artiﬁcial recharge, case study Meimeh Basin, Isfahan,
Iran. Environ. Geol. 47, 493–500 (2005)

6. Cowen, D.: GIS versus CAD versus DBMS: what are the diﬀerences ? Photogram. Eng.

Remote Sens. 54, 1551–1555 (1988)

7. Malczewski,  J.,  Rinner,  C.:  Multicriteria  Decision  Analysis  in  Geographic  Information

Science. Advances in Geographic Information Sciences. Springer, New York (2015)

8. MacEachren, A.M., Brewer, I.: Developing a conceptual framework for visually-enabled

geocollaboration. Int. J. Geogr. Inf. Sci. 18(1), 1–34 (2004)

9. Bailey,  K.,  Grossardt, T.:  Toward structured public involvement: justice, geography and
collaborative geospatial/geovisual decision support systems. Ann. Assoc. Am. Geogr. 100(1),
57–86 (2010)

10. Greene, R., Devillers, R., Luther, J., Eddy, B.: GIS-based multiple-criteria decision analysis.

Geogr. Compass 5(6), 412–432 (2011)

11. Karacapilidis,  N.,  Papadias,  D.:  Computer  supported  argumentation  and  collaborative

decision making: the HERMES system. Inf. Syst. 26(4), 259–277 (2001)

12. Malafant, K., Fordham, D., Uso, J., Brebbia, C., Power, H., et al.: GIS, DSS and integrated
scenario modelling frameworks for exploring alternative futures. In: Advances in Ecological
Sciences. Ecosystems and Sustainable Development, vol. 1 (1998)

13. Sentz, K., Ferson, S.: Combination of Evidence in Dempster-Shafer Theory, vol. 4015. Sandia

National Laboratories, Albuquerque (2002)

14. Frez, J., Baloian, N., Pino, J.A., Zurita, G.: Cooperative work for spatial decision making: an
emergencies management case. In: Baloian, N., Burstein, F., Ogata, H., Santoro, F., Zurita,
G. (eds.) CRIWG 2014. LNCS, vol. 8658, pp. 113–120. Springer, Heidelberg (2014)

15. Borges, M.R., Brézillon, P., Pino, J.A., Pomerol, J.-C.: Groupware system design and the
context concept. In: Shen, W.-m., Lin, Z., Barthès, J.-P.A., Li, T.-Q. (eds.) CSCWD 2004.
LNCS, vol. 3168, pp. 45–54. Springer, Heidelberg (2005)

16. Nyerges,  T.L.,  Janowski,  P.:  Regional  and  Urban  GIS:  A  Decision  Support  Approach.

Guilford Press, New York (2012)

17. Antunes, P., Zurita, G., Baloian, N., Sapateiro, C.: Integrating decision-making support in

geocollaboration tools. Group Decis. Negot. 23(2), 211–233 (2014)

18. Zurita,  G.,  Baloian,  N.:  Mobile:  Collaborative  situated  knowledge  creation  for  urban

planning. Sensors 12(5), 6218–6243 (2012)

