Increasing Opportunities for Interaction in Time-Critical 

Mobile Collaborative Settings  

Valeria Herskovic1, David A. Mejía2, Jesús Favela2, Alberto L. Morán3,  

Sergio F. Ochoa1, and José A. Pino1 

1 Department of Computer Science, Universidad de Chile, Chile 

{vherskov,jpino,sochoa}@dcc.uchile.cl  

2 Departamento de Ciencias de la Computación, CICESE, Ensenada, México 

{mejiam,favela}@cicese.mx  

3 Facultad de Ciencias, UABC, Ensenada, México 

alberto_moran@uabc.mx 

Abstract. The critical nature of some working environments, such as hospitals 
or search and rescue operations, gives rise to the need for timely collaboration. 
However, interactions are not always possible since potential collaborators may 
be unreachable because of the lack of a communication channel to carry out the 
interaction or due to their involvement in other activities. The use of adequate 
interaction  facilitators  may  allow  users  to  collaborate  even  in  these  circumstances.
 This paper presents a characterization of this type of situation and then 
introduces a set of design suggestions that may help improve opportunities for 
user interaction in time critical mobile collaborative settings.  

1   Introduction 

Recent mobile technologies, such as smartphones and 3G, allow people to work collaboratively 
while on the move, and motivate developers to build new mobile groupware 
 applications.  However,  we  still  need  to  increase  our  understanding  of  mobile 
environments to develop applications that better support collaborative work.  

Communication is essential in mobile collaborative environments. It is the basis to 
make  coordination  and  collaboration  possible  in  any  work  scenario  [7].  In  mobile 
collaboration, people may need to move to interact with others, or they may need to 
interact  with  others  while  they  are  on  the  move.  Collaboration  among  persons  and 
resource  sharing  usually  require  a  communication  channel.  Nevertheless,  there  are 
some  situations  in  which  interaction  is  not  possible  even  when  a  communication 
channel is available, e.g., when one of the collaborators is unavailable. In non-critical 
activities, people are willing to wait for a natural opportunity for interaction when this 
situation occurs. However, people do not have time to wait for an interaction in timecritical 
scenarios. In these settings, finding a particular person or resource as soon as 
possible can be vital to the success of the collaborative effort. For this reason, improving 
interaction opportunities can benefit the results of the collaborative work.  

Section 2 presents observations of two mobile collaborative work settings. Section 3 
characterizes  this  type  of  work.  Section  4  presents  the  proposal.  Section  5  presents 
related work. Finally, section 6 presents the conclusions. 

L. Carriço, N. Baloian, and B. Fonseca (Eds.): CRIWG 2009, LNCS 5784, pp. 41–48, 2009. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009 

42 

V. Herskovic et al. 

2   Time-Critical Mobile Collaborative Settings 

The  scenarios  of  emergency  management  and  hospital  work  are  similar  in  that  the 
work is collaborative, mobile, and by nature urgent during certain periods of time. We 
define this type of scenario as a time-critical mobile collaborative setting (TMC). In 
these settings, mobile workers are autonomous most of the time, and interactions are 
motivated  by  the  occurrence  of  triggering  events.  This  means  that  at  some  point  in 
time, which cannot be anticipated, the actors will need to interact in order to respond 
to the event, usually involving information exchange and/or work synchronization.  

This section presents observations from studies in two TMC settings. The information 
was collected in a medium-size public hospital through shadowing and reported 
in [7], and in urban search and rescue exercises through interviews, observation, and 
the study of documents detailing work procedures [3].  

2.1   Hospital Work 

Hospital work is characterized by the need for coordination and collaboration among 
specialists with various areas of expertise, task switching, information exchange, data 
integration, and the mobility of staff, patients, documents and equipment [8]. At the 
same time, this working environment is highly critical and error prone [5].  

In  this  TMC  environment,  informal  communication  is  an  essential  resource  for 
supporting  coordinated  medical  tasks,  to  discuss  diagnoses  and  treatments  and  to 
gather  the  artifacts  and  human  resources  necessary  for  patient  care  [7;  8].  Hospital 
staff spend 53% of their time outside their base location [8], which triggers spontaneous 
interactions. At other times, workers may be found in specific locations. 

Face-to-face is not the only communication channel that medical workers use to interact.
 In some situations,  when one of the collaborators is unavailable (e.g., if they 
work  in  different  shifts),  medical  workers  communicate  asynchronously  by  leaving 
instructions or notes in information artifacts such as medical records and clipboards.  
In  addition,  in  some  situations  a  medical  worker  may  be  in  the  hospital,  but  unavailable 
 for  interaction  due  to  the  activities  he  is  performing  (e.g.,  surgical  procedures,
 meetings). We illustrate this situation through the following scenario: 

The medical intern goes to the specialist’s consulting room to discuss a patient. 

      [Medical Intern]    Hi, is Dr. (the medical specialist’s last name) here? 
               [Secretary]   No, she is in Internal Medicine. 

The intern then goes to Internal Medicine and asks for the location of the specialist. 

        [Medical Intern] 
                       [Nurse] 
        [Medical Intern] 
                       [Nurse] 
        [Medical Intern] 

Have you seen the medical specialist here? 
Yes, she is in room 235. 
Is she busy now? 
I guess so, she is performing a (clinical procedure). 
Ok, I will have to look for her later. 

In this scenario, the medical intern cannot interact with the medical specialist because 
she  is  unavailable.  If  the  intern  required  an  interaction  to  solve  an  urgent  situation, 
this could have caused a problem in the patient’s treatment.  

Increasing Opportunities for Interaction in Time-Critical Mobile Collaborative Settings 

43 

2.2   Search and Rescue Operations 

Some  catastrophic  events,  such  as  floods,  earthquakes  and  chemical  spills  require 
specialized teams of firefighters to conduct search and rescue operations. In this TMC 
environment, firefighters use radio, marking systems and face-to-face communication 
to exchange information about resource allocation, location of victims, and dangerous 
and safe areas. Their goal is to find and rescue all victims as fast as possible because 
the number of diseases grows exponentially during the first 24hs [11].  

Inside  the  emergency  area,  teams  of  firefighters  move  constantly  to  assess  the 
emergency  situation,  search  for  victims,  and  communicate  work  progress.  These 
teams are autonomous; interactions among them occur when there is a specific need 
(e.g., a stretcher is needed to carry a victim) or triggering event (e.g, an earthquake 
replica  has  trapped  a  firefighter).    Firefighters’  main  communication  channel  is  a 
radio system (2 to 3 channels per emergency). This system is used both for important 
and non-important messages (e.g. reporting the injuries a victim has sustained). Frequently,
  the  messages  are  not  heard  (e.g.,  due  to  environmental  noise);  they  often 
have to be repeated several times. Sometimes, urgent messages cannot be delivered. 
We illustrate these communication difficulties with the following observed scenario: 

The incident commander (IC) gives directions through the radio to the team captain 
in charge of evaluating the stability of the affected civil infrastructure. 

[IC] Please report on progress so a team can move into the building to search. 
(The captain’s team is cutting wood and the environmental noise is very loud) 
[IC] Please report on progress so a team can move into the building to search. 
(A couple of minutes later) 
[IC] Please report on progress so a team can move into the building to search. 
[Captain] OK... (He reports on progress) 

In highly critical situations,  firefighters  use an audible signal that is loud enough to 
always  be  heard.  There  is  a  small  set  of  these  signals,  which  are  delivered  only  in 
critical situations, e.g., when the collapse of a building is imminent.  

2.3   Discussion of Communication Patterns in TMC Settings 

The observations in two TMC settings allowed  us to identify two important dimensions 
of communication in TMC settings: communication and time. 

Communication is basic for many strategies mobile workers use. Communication 
problems  strongly  decrease  the  opportunities  to  carry  out  collaborative  interactions, 
some of which could be urgent or critical. For example, a rescuer has found a group 
of  trapped  victims  and  he  needs  to  get  help  on  time.  If  the  communication  channel 
and the people involved are available, the interactions will be possible and the critical 
situations may evolve positively. Otherwise, the consequences will be unpredictable.  
In the case of firefighters, most breakdowns in communication are due to the failure 
 or  unavailability  of  a  communication  channel.  Communication  through  media 
such as radio and marking systems is often unnoticed. The only effective channel is 
the audible alarm; yet, it can only convey simple predefined messages. In hospitals, 
communication failures are usually due to unavailability of one of the collaborators.  

44 

V. Herskovic et al. 

Time  is  important  when  providing  support  to  collaboration.  In  the  case  of  TMC 
settings it is particularly so because communication should be carried out during particular 
time frames. After that, the communication goal may become obsolete.  

3   Characterization of Interaction States in TMC Settings 

The  observations  presented  above  highlight  the  importance  of  finding  the  required 
collaborators  and  communicating  with  them.  We  define  two  dimensions  that  are  of 
interest to study mobile collaboration. They are simultaneity and reachability, which 
are strongly related to time and communication. When an actor requires an interaction 
with someone, their relationship will be in one of the quadrants shown in Fig. 1 [3]. 

Fig. 1. The four possible interaction states in TMC settings 

 

Whenever  the  actors  need  to  interact,  they  will  be  in  a  particular  quadrant  of  
the  classification.  There  are  four  possible  states:  simultaneous/reachable  (SR),  
simultaneous/unreachable 
(NR)  and  non-
simultaneous/unreachable  (NU).  During  their  work,  two  actors  may  pass  through 
several states. Fig. 2 presents a state diagram for one actor, illustrating the transitions 
between states that may happen during his workday in relation to a collaborator.  

(SU),  non-simultaneous/reachable 

The SR situation represents a typical synchronous collaboration scenario. Several 
types of technological support for this scenario currently exist, such as IM, file transfer,
  etc.  In  the  NR  situation,  some  solutions  (e.g.,  email,  synchronization  with  a 
server) also exist. The NU scenario is infrequent, and may happen e.g., when collaboration 
is being established or between actors who communicate erratically.  

The SU scenario occurs whenever the communication channel between two actors 
is unavailable, or when one of the actors is not available. Consequently, even if the 
collaboration  could  benefit  from  two  actors’  interaction,  it  is  not  possible.  In  non 
time-critical  work environments, the change  from  state SU to SR or NR  may occur 
naturally within some time; however, in time-critical situations, actors are reluctant to 
wait for the state change. In these cases, helping actors move from a SU state to SR or 

Increasing Opportunities for Interaction in Time-Critical Mobile Collaborative Settings 

45 

a  NR  state  could  enable  collaboration  or  improve  it  to  address  the  critical  situation 
faster. The next section proposes strategies that can be incorporated into mobile collaborative 
systems to move collaboration scenarios towards favorable settings.  

Fig. 2. State diagram for an actor with respect to a collaborator 

 

4   Allowing Interactions in SU States 

In TMC settings, unreachability is a synonym of no collaboration. However, unreachability 
 may  sometimes  be  transformed  into  reachability.  The  solutions  proposed  in 
this  section  use  existing  and  new  mechanisms  to  try  to  deal  with  the  causes  of  unreachability,
 namely, lack of a communication channel and unavailability of collaborators.
 Even though not all instances of SU states may be solved, in some cases a user 
may obtain the results needed from the interaction and continue working.  

4.1   Strategies to Increase Opportunities for Interaction  

Uncoupled Management of Resources. Actors often need to interact to exchange resources,
 but when a user is unavailable his/her resources are also unavailable. If we 
uncouple user management from resource management it could be possible to move 
the interaction from the SU to the SR quadrant. For example, a user might anticipate 
that he will become unavailable for some time, and choose to make some of his resources 
accessible in the system for this time period and/or for certain users.   
 
Use  of  Intermediaries  for  Synchronous  Interactions.  Typically,  in  nomadic  work  a 
person can easily interact with other persons or resources that are “one-hop” away [9]. 
In that scenario each person or resource located two or more hops away will be unreachable 
for potential requesters. If we take advantage of the intermediaries that are 

46 

V. Herskovic et al. 

present in the work area (other mobile computing devices and access points) it could 
be possible to move the interaction from the SU to the SR quadrants. Therefore, if the 
intermediaries are used as part of the solution, reachability can be achieved. 
 
Use of Equivalent Alternatives. Mobile workers usually need to exchange ideas with 
other people and have access to skills, and other knowledge. Thus, when a user needs 
to  interact  with  an  unavailable  collaborator,  he  may  be  redirected  to  an  appropriate 
intermediary,  either  referred  by  the  original  collaborator  or  through  an  automatic 
recommendation system. It is then possible to move a SU interaction to a SR one by 
replacing the original collaborator with an equivalent alternative one. 
 
Use of Collaboration Promoting Awareness (CPA). We call CPA to those proactive 
mechanisms which provide awareness information to a user to promote collaborative 
interactions. These awareness mechanisms  must be autonomous and use the context 
information [1] to induce a collaboration instance, once the user has expressed his/her 
need  to  interact  with  another  one.  In  this  way,  a  user  may  be  aware  of  other  users’ 
availability. Awareness may also be provided to users when they are being required, 
to provide them with an opportunity to interact or to clarify their interrupt status.  

4.2   Design Suggestions 

Displaying user availability. When a user needs to interact with another user, he must 
be aware of his partner’s availability to determine whether the interaction can occur. 
Therefore, the system may provide users with contextual information (e.g., user location,
 nearby users) that helps them determine whether a user is available or not.  
 
Searching for a potential collaborator. The system should allow users to specify the 
identity of the user they are looking for, even if he/she is unreachable.  
 
Identifying alternative collaborators. When a user needs to interact with an unavailable 
collaborator, he may contact another person who may have a similar set of skills 
or knowledge. In this case, the system may suggest these alternative collaborators by 
using a manual or automatic role-based recommendation system. 
 
Contextual management of resources. When a user wants to interact with another one, 
he  may  actually  need  to  access  a  resource  containing  ongoing  work  between  them. 
Thus, contextual information about resource use (e.g., location) should be stored. This 
data may be used to automatically grant or deny access when the owner is not available.
 The system may also grant access to restricted resources in critical events. 
 
Searching for an equivalent resource. A person may need a resource belonging to an 
unavailable information source (a person or an intermediary server). The application 
should allow searching for a similar resource among reachable information sources.  
 
Establishing  alternative  routes  for  communication.  Two  users  may  need  to  interact 
while  lacking  a  direct  communication  channel.  In  this  case,  the  system  may  implement 
alternative communication routes using intermediary nodes to forward messages 
between requester and responder. Routing may provide a channel between collaborators 
or extend the communication threshold of the system. 

Increasing Opportunities for Interaction in Time-Critical Mobile Collaborative Settings 

47 

Allowing gossip mechanisms. Sometimes collaborators are unable to interact even if 
the mechanisms described above are implemented (e.g., in disperse work scenarios). 
In that case, a gossip, which is a message traveling through the network searching for 
the destination user during a time period, may be used. These messages try to force a 
reachable situation, e.g., “URGENT: be at X at 9AM”.  
 
Pushing notifications. After a few unsuccessful tries to interact with somebody, a user 
may desist trying to reach the person, who  might become available a moment later. 
Thus, the system should notify the user when the destination becomes reachable. 

Table 1. Matching between strategies and design guides 

Strategies 

Uncoupled Management of Resources 

Use  of  Intermediaries  for  Synchronous 
Interactions 

Use of Equivalent Alternatives 

Use  of  Collaboration  Promoting  Awareness 


Design Suggestion 
•  Contextual management of resources 
•  Searching for an equivalent resource 
•  Displaying user availability 
•  Establishing alternative routes for communication 
•  Allowing gossip mechanisms 
•  Searching for potential collaborators 
• 
Identifying alternative collaborators 
•  Displaying user availability 
•  Searching for potential collaborators 
•  Pushing notifications 
•  Searching for potential collaborators 

5   Related Work  

Time-critical  settings  include  several  areas  of  mobile  work  such  as  service  technicians,
 police patrols and firemen [6], as well as hospitals. Several systems have been 
proposed to support firefighting work. Most identify the lack of a reliable communication 
channel and provide alternatives, effectively diminishing the time users spend 
in a SU state. For example, Siren [4] supports work in search and rescue operations 
using a peer-to-peer architecture, so intermediary nodes are used to transfer information 
 between  firefighters  in  the  field.  Unreachability  is  usually  caused  by  lack  of  a 
reliable communication channel, but it may also be caused by unavailability, e.g., in 
an emergency in which all firefighters are engaged in urgent tasks. This case is seldom 
acknowledged in the emergency management literature. 

Hospital settings provide conditions for reliable communication channels. In hospitals,
  workers  become  unreachable  either  because  they  cannot  be  located  or  because 
they  are  unavailable.  To  address  user  location,  some  mechanisms  are  in  use  (e.g., 
megaphones) or have been proposed, such as a neural network embedded within the 
component and used to estimate location of users and devices [2]. Another approach 
is [10], which presents an approach to estimate activities. This data could be used as a 
trigger to start interaction by advertising user availability. Thus, research in hospitals 
is aimed at showing  where an actor is or what  he/she is doing in order to approach 
him/her. However, these efforts do not deal with user unavailability. 

48 

V. Herskovic et al. 

6   Conclusions 

Communication and time are essential resources in time-critical mobile environments. 
We  identified  four  collaboration  situations  based  on  the  dimensions  of  reachability 
and  simultaneity:  Simultaneous  reachable  (SR),  non-simultaneous  reachable  (NR), 
simultaneous  unreachable  (SU),  and  non-simultaneous  unreachable  (SU).  There  are 
several strategies that may be used to facilitate communication in two of these situations 
 (SR  and  NR).  However,  the  SU  state  currently  does  not  allow  for  interaction 
among  actors,  which  may  be  crucial  in  time-critical  settings.  This  paper  presented 
strategies that assist moving from a SU setting to a SR or NR setting, and design suggestions 
that may help implement these strategies in a mobile application.  

This paper identifies the existence of SU states and affords visibility to this problem,
 as well as allows designers and developers to consider it when developing systems 
in TMC settings. We believe that incorporating these strategies into the design 
of a system may help increase the number of interactions that occur during collaboration,
 improving the results of the collaborative process. 
 
Acknowledgements.  This  work  was  partially  supported  by  Fondecyt  (Chile)  grants 
11060467 and 1080352, and LACCIR grants R0308LAC005 and S1108LAC002. 

References 

1.  Brezillon, P., Borges, M., Pino, J.A., Pomerol, J.C.: Context and awareness in Group Work. 

Lessons learned from three case studies. J. of Decision Systems 17(1), 27–40 (2008) 

2.  Castro, L.A., Favela, J.: Continuous Tracking of User Location in WLANs Using Recurrent 
Neural Networks. In: Proc. of the 6th Mexican International Conf. on Comp. Science, 
pp. 174–181. IEEE Comp. Society, Los Alamitos (2005) 

3.  Herskovic,  V.,  Ochoa,  S.F.,  Pino,  J.A.:  Modeling  Groupware  for  Mobile  Collaborative 

Work. In: Proceedings of CSCWD 2009 (to be published, 2009) 

4.  Jiang, X., Chen, N., Hong, J.I., Wang, K., Takayama, L., Landay, J.: Siren: Context-Aware 
Computing for Firefighting. In: Ferscha, A., Mattern, F. (eds.) PERVASIVE 2004. LNCS, 
vol. 3001, pp. 87–105. Springer, Heidelberg (2004) 

5.  Kohn,  L.T.,  Corrigan,  J.M.,  Donaldson, M.S.  (eds.):  To  Err  is  Human:  Building  a  Safer 

Health System. National Academy Press, Washington (1999) 

6.  Landgren, J.: Making action visible in time-critical work. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
conference  on  Human  Factors  in  computing  systems,  pp.  201–210.  ACM,  New  York 
(2006) 

7.  Mejia, D., Morán, A.L., Favela, J.: Supporting Informal Co-located Collaboration in Hospital 
 Work.  In:  Haake,  J.M.,  Ochoa,  S.F.,  Cechich,  A.  (eds.)  CRIWG  2007.  LNCS, 
vol. 4715, pp. 255–270. Springer, Heidelberg (2007) 

8.  Morán,  E.B.,  Tentori,  M.,  Gonzalez,  V.M.,  Favela,  J.:  A.I.  Mobility  in  Hospital  Work: 
Towards  a  Pervasive  Computing  Hospital  Environment.  International  J.  of  Electronic 
Healthcare (IJEH) 3(1), 72–89 (2007) 

9.  Neyem, A., Ochoa, S.F., Pino, J.A.: Integrating Service-Oriented Mobile Units to Support 

Collaboration in Ad-hoc Scenarios. J. Univers. Comput. Sci. 14(1), 88–122 (2008) 

10.  Sánchez, D., Tentori, M., Favela, J.: Activity Recognition for the Smart Hospital. IEEE Intelligent 
Systems 23(2), 50–57 (2008) 

11.  Yusuke, M.: Collaborative Environments for Disaster Relief. Master’s Thesis, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology (2001) 

