An Integrated Environment to Aid Knowledge Exchange 
and Collaboration Using Mobile Devices in a Healthcare 

Context 

Diego da S. Souza1, Pedro C. da Silveira2, Patrícia Zudio de Lima1, Jonice Oliveira1,2, 

Sergio F. Ochoa4, José Pino4, and Jano Moreira de Souza3 

1 Programa de Pós-Graduação em Informática, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro,   

2 Departamento de Ciência da Computação, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro,   

Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 

Rio de Janeiro, Brazil   

3 COPPE - Programa de Engenharia de Sistemas e Computação,   
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 

{diessouza,pedrosilveira,patriciazudio}@ufrj.br, 

jonice@dcc.ufrj.br, jano@cos.ufrj.br 

4 Department of Computer Science, Universidad de Chile, Santiago de Chile, Chile 

{sochoa,jpino}@dcc.uchile.cl 

Abstract. Due to the popularization of mobile devices such as smartphones and 
tablets,  the  number  of  applications  being  developed  for  these  platforms  increases 
every day. With that, different scenarios are being supported by these 
new  systems,  among  them  the  healthcare  scenario.  By  following  the  said  advances,
 this article portrays the operation of an integrated approach consisting 
of two applications created for mobile devices and focused on the improvement 
of  the  healthcare  environment,  especially  in  respect  to  the  exchange  of   
knowledge.  The  first  application  finds  the  position  of  people  inside  a  closed   
environment seeking to promote a more personal meeting. The second application 
 allows  the  exchange  of  knowledge  between  people  sharing  a  common 
space. The contribution of this integration along with the impact on healthcare 
scenarios will be described. Both applications have been tested in a controlled 
environment. 

Keywords:  Ubiquitous  Computing,  Ambient  Intelligence,  eHealth,  Dynamic 
Collaboration, Knowledge Dissemination, Opportunistic Collaboration, Mobile 
Computing. 

1 

Introduction 

With the advance of wireless technologies, the way we communicate with the world 
changes every day. Mobile devices such as cell phones, netbooks and more recently 
tablets, allow us to be permanently connected with the people. This need of interaction 
 makes  people  trade  knowledge  constantly.  Besides  that,  most  human  activities 
have been transferred from personal computers to their respective mobiles[1]. People 

J. Bravo, D. López-de-Ipiña, and F. Moya (Eds.): UCAmI 2012, LNCS 7656, pp. 430–437, 2012. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012 

 

An Integrated Environment to Aid Knowledge Exchange and Collaboration 

431 

chat  on  their  phones  wherever  they  are,  photos  of  interesting  places  are  shared  between 
smartphones, text messages are sent. However, once the interactions are over, 
much information is lost for not being stored. 

This revolution in wireless technology provides us with new perspectives of communication 
and social interaction. Some aspects may be noted in relation to this new 
kind  of  interaction.  Firstly,  time  and  space  are  not  a  problem  anymore.  People  can 
work or entertain themselves anywhere and anytime only needing an Internet connection 
 for  that.  The  second  difference  is  that  human  interactions  are  easier  to  happen 
than in the past although they may be shorter. One may search, find, and interact with 
someone  for some activities  but these interactions are  weak and  will  most likely be 
lost as they    end. 

Those  points  relate  to  a  new  phase  in  life  called  ‘cyberculture’[2].  Cyberculture 
envelops  people  and  objects  in  a  immense  and  connected  environment.  Along  with 
the development of mobile technology, this type of culture and its spaces allow us to 
enter a  new era,  marked by the  ‘collective and distributed’, the collective being  the 
partial  and  temporal  aggregation  of  many  items.  This  highly  connected  scenario  is 
changing  the  way  people  interact  with  the  spaces  and  the  world  takes  new  dimen-
sions[3]. 

Working with the hypothesis that the misuse of information or even the lack of it is 
a problem that affects several scenarios, damaging them in many areas, some alternatives 
that bypass or improve the situation are being studied. More specifically, in the 
healthcare  scenario,  the  lack  of  information  may  delay  people  in  their  search  for 
medical  assistance  or  even  take  actions  contrary  to  the  indicated  treatment  which 
consequently increases the risk to patient's life and delays one's recovery. 

By allowing the introduction of new technologies along with simple ideas, we can 
see the impacts on the big picture. A quick web search of symptoms gives an array of 
possible  illnesses,  storing  patients  records  on  a  database  for  quick  access  anywhere 
using a portable device, all simple ideas that eases the life and work of patients and 
medical staff alike. 

In this work, we will present a proposal on how the dissemination of knowledge in 
a proactive way and how finding someone in a closed environment may be used together 
to enhance the healthcare environment as both ideas mean to support the work 
of the people involved. 

By following these concepts, this work is divided as follows: the next chapter will 
give a brief description of the eHealth scenario. Considering that this integrated approach 
 is  focused  on  the  use  of  mobile  devices  and  aims  to  assist  knowledge  exchange 
 and  collaboration  among  those  involved  in  a  healthcare  scenario,  Chapter  3 
will show the module responsible for the functionalities of the indoor location system, 
EDIPS [4]. Chapter 4 will describe MEK[5], the module responsible for the knowledge 
exchange functionalities. The proposed integration of the two ideas and contribution 
to  the scenario of eHealth  will be  shown in  Chapter 5. A conclusion on  this 
research is provided in Chapter 6. 

432 

D. da S. Souza et al. 

2 

eHealth 

The  technological  progress  of  areas  such  as  Computing  and  Electronics  benefited 
several sectors in society, among them the  medical domain. New terms appeared in 
this field to designate its integration with technology, such as ‘eHealth’. 

The concept of eHealth admits different meanings [6], such as representing the use 
of the Internet to access any kind of information related to healthcare, besides services 
and applications [7]. In general, it  means everything that relates to Computing  with 
Medicine  [8],  encompassing  the  ICTs  (Information  Communication  Technology)  as 
used in healthcare for administrative, clinical, and research purposes [9]. 

Nowadays, with the popularization of mobile devices and wireless technology, new 
applications  have  appeared  in  this  field,  allowing  the  access  to  information  in  any 
place and at any time. For an example in healthcare, it is now possible for a patient to 
make an appointment with the doctor without being in the presence of each other [10]. 
With technological support, it is now possible to have a great deal of information 
available in different scenarios, about different themes. In healthcare, in a place like a 
hospital,  information  on  diseases,  medical  specialists,  patient  experience  with  any 
kind of disease, treatments or other kind of information are dispersed. In other words, 
there is information but it is misused in most cases for being restricted to one person 
or one group. 

The correct use of information and the easy access to it contribute in a positive way 
to the daily routines of healthcare, allowing knowledge exchange between people and 
the quick dissemination of information. 

There are some computer applications in this scenario that use these technologies 
to  improve  the  day-to-day  of  a  health  care  scenario  such  as:  1-MEK,  Mobile  Exchange 
of Knowledge, an application created for knowledge dissemination in a viral 
way via Bluetooth; 2-EDIPS, Easy to Deploy Indoor Positioning System, developed 
to  detect  the  position  of  mobile  devices  in  a  enclosed  place,  where  a  GPS  (Global 
Positioning System) does not work correctly (as it calculates position only using latitude 
 and  longitude,  without  considering  depth),  using  Wi-Fi;  3-Lifelink,  technology 
created for doctors to remotely monitor in real time their patients via mobile devices 
and 3G [11]; 4-MobileMed, which integrates clinical data for patients that is distributed 
and fragmented in different systems, being available via Personal Digital Assistants 
 (PDAs)  [12];  5A 
 system  for  mobile  devices  whose  goal  is  to  help  doctors   
detect bone fragility in the elderly [13]. 

Given that the problem we want to solve is the misuse of information and its access 
restrictions in a healthcare scenario, our hypothesis is that the propagation of information 
in a opportunistic way will help it. This way, we propose an integrated approach 
involving two applications, MEK and EDIPS, to be shown in the next sections. 

3 

EDIPS: An Easy to Deploy Indoor Positioning System 

The EDIPS, Easy to Deploy  Indoor Positioning System, is an application that  maps 
the position of several people in a closed environment, functions as an internal GPS, 
using Wi-Fi. 

 

An Integrated Environment to Aid Knowledge Exchange and Collaboration 

433 

The EDIPS has two operating phases: offline and online. During the offline phase, 
the mapping of signal strength blueprint is made and stored in the device afterwards. 
Signal strength is calculated for each reference point or access point. Once the blueprint 
has been produced, the discretization of the space is performed. A matrix of cells 
of fixed sizes is overlapped to the blueprint, and these cells receive expected signal 
strength values, considering the reference points. Normally, in other applications, the 
reduced   signal modelling considers a large number of samples taken in the operating 
area. This step is completely ignored by EDIPS, promoting a fast deployment with an 
acceptable degree of precision. 

For EDIPS to locate a device, it must have the local map and the map of reference 
points. If  the device does  not have this information, it  still can  get them by  finding 
another device in the LAN that owns it. 

The  online  phase  aims  to  keep  updated  the  devices'  positions  that  are  being 
screened. This step is aided by the use of HLMP API[14]. During this phase, the data 
received is processed to acquire an   estimated position of the device. From this estimation,
  each  cell  is  investigated  to  determine  which  one  minimizes  the  positioning 
error and then choosing the one whose position is most likely. 

4  MEK: Mobile Exchange of Knowledge 

The  main  purpose  of  MEK,  Mobile  Exchange  of  Knowledge,  is  to  disseminate 
knowledge in a proactive and viral way. We consider as knowledge any information 
that can be scanned or created digitally, such as image, text, or sound. 

The  exchange  of  knowledge  between  devices  is  done  via  a  Bluetooth  protocol. 
This technology was chosen because it is very present and widespread in mobile devices,
  especially  mobile  phones.  It  was  also  chosen  due  to  the  little  infrastructure 
required,  as  it  just  needs  devices  to  have  their  Bluetooth  hardware  connected  and 
visible to other users. 

Our motivation to do this research came from the fact that people, having so much 
access to information, can be considered a great source of knowledge. Avoiding the 
information  being  restricted  to  only  one  person  or  a  group,  MEK  aims  to  increase 
collaboration  between  people,  forming  a  network  of  knowledge  exchange  amongst 
users with the same interest. 

Initially, the user fills a small form where one informs one’s areas of interest and 
relevant  keywords,  making  a  profile  that  will  be  used  in  knowledge  exchange.  The 
areas of interest mentioned are based on a predefined taxonomy which is structured as 
a tree. For tests in the university, the great areas of a science tree were used, as created 
by CNPq[15]. Besides making a profile, the user can subscribe knowledge in a 
mobile  phone.  This  knowledge  will  be  rated  according  to  the  same  tree  mentioned 
above and keywords will be used to improve knowledge classification. 

For knowledge exchange, the MEK periodically searches for other mobile phones 
running the application next to it. When a device is found, the user profile is sent to it 
and there is a crossing of information between the requesting interests and keywords 

434 

D. da S. Souza et al. 

with  one’s  interests  and  stored  knowledge  keywords.  If  one  or  more  matches  is/are 
found, the selected knowledge is sent to the requesting party.   

There is also the possibility of the user searching for knowledge actively in nearby 
devices using a filter that can use information such as title, keywords or interest area 
provided by the user in the search. 

5 

Proposal of Integration 

This section will describe the integration between the two tools presented earlier. This 
integration  aims  to  increase  collaboration  between  different  people  involved  in  the 
health scenario and enhance the eHealth environment, as shown in Fig 1. 
 

Fig. 1. Conceptual Integration 

 

5.1  Conceptual Integration 

Both  applications  work  with  ‘loosely  coupled  mobile  work’[16],  i.e.,  connections 
between mobile devices or between mobile devices and a server, on demand, which 
are  marked  by  short  time.  This  kind  of  connection  became  very  important  with  the 
spread of wireless networks. 

The  MEK  aims  at  disseminating  knowledge  amongst  its  users  and  can  identify 
their interests through its application (profile member). Besides this type of information,
 knowledge or skills can also be identified and stored by analyzing the changes 
occurring amongst the users. This information can be very important for the EDIPS 
which locates and maps its clients. This application could use some context information 
 provided  by  the  MEK  to  locate  persons  and  identify  those  that  have  the  user's 
interest, a discretization of the area can be done too. This information can be offered 
in a visual way to the users' EDIPS. According to the data received from the MEK, 
the EDIPS can identify on the area map of the environment that the application has, 
the areas which have the greatest concentration of one specific knowledge, as identified 
with the same colour, or a label, of people who have the same interest. 

Moreover, the EDIPS also provides information on people's location to the MEK, 
which does not have this kind of information. The MEK, having acquired this data, 

 

An Integrated Environment to Aid Knowledge Exchange and Collaboration 

435 

can make a complex analysis on knowledge exchange such as discovering areas that 
concentrate  specific  kinds  of  knowledge  and  the  frequency  with  which  those  exchanges 
occur. 

Due to these factors, this integration can be applied to use in many different environments,
 mostly in healthcare scenarios. 

5.2  Example Scenarios 

Amongst  the  various  scenarios  where  this  approach  can  be  present,  the  healthcare 
environment was chosen as our major scenario. There are many elements in this context 
such as: doctors and other health professionals, patients (adults or children) and 
their families and friends, besides recovered patients who still are in observation and 
the people responsible for hospital management. All these people will be involved in 
this research. 

Doctors can use this new application to identify other specialists, as well as share 
their knowledge between them, such as knowledge on the treatment of diseases. This 
information can be stored in the doctor's device that will be available to exchange. If 
another device that has the same interest is found, the application will send the information 
to it. Furthermore, a face-to-face meeting can be promoted by the people location 
feature, allowing greater knowledge exchange and collaboration between them.     
Patients under treatment can enter their queries about diseases into their devices. If 
doctors or nurses who have relevant information on such a query are nearby they can 
exchange this knowledge. Doubts and difficulties on some part of the disease recovery 
process can also be assigned, and a face-to-face meeting can be promoted by the 
application between patients and ex-patients to exchange histories. 

The same can occur between patients and their friends, searching for other people 
who have information or experiences on how to deal with this situation, besides their 
loved ones. 

The  application  will  be  useful  for  hospitals  managers  to  identify  areas  that  have 
greater knowledge exchange and its frequency in the building map. This analysis can 
reveal specific areas, separated by issue, identifying in this  way, knowledge centres 
versus time periods. 

This application can be used in many contexts, thus this research contributes to the 
eHealth scenario, allowing knowledge exchange and providing information to understand 
how knowledge is disseminated, and who the major information suppliers or the 
people who need information the most are. 

5.3 

Integration 

This  section  will  describe  how  the  integration  between  the  two  applications  will  be 
made. Bluetooth protocol and XML files are used to perform this transfer. 

The MEK will capture data about the profile, the interests of its users and the exchanges 
made between them. These data will be processed by the tool and stored in 
XML  files.  A  unique  ID  for  each  user  will  also  be  stored  in  these  files,  thus   
applications  know  which  user  data  refer.  This  identification  may  be  given  by  the 

436 

D. da S. Souza et al. 

unique  identifier  for  each  unit.  With  these  data,  the  EDIPS  may  conduct  analyzes 
promoting  discretizations  of  the  areas  that  are  most  likely  to  propagate  a  particular 
knowledge, as shown in figure below (Fig. 2). The circular regions show areas where 
people interested 
in a particular subject can be found. Areas that may be sources of 
information can also be bounded by EDIPS. 

On the other hand, the EDIPS will also collect information about the positioning of 
the people to provide for the MEK. The MEK  will collect  this information and can 
perform  several  analyzes  with  them,  for  example,  analyzes  related  to  what  was 
changed and the location where the exchange occurred. Again, the exchange of files 
from the EDIPS for the MEK will be done through Bluetooth protocol. 

 
 

Fig. 2. Old and new EDIPS screens, using information promoted by MEK 

 

6 

Conclusion 

The main objective of this research  was to improve the healthcare scenario by integrating 
two applications. The first goal is to disseminate knowledge virally and in a 
proactive way via a Bluetooth protocol. The other application works as a people locator 
using Wi-Fi signals. As we know Bluetooth has a limited range and Wi-Fi signals 
are not found everywhere, this research proposes to unify the two applications to enable 
knowledge exchange using Wi-Fi. 

This integration was proposed to disseminate knowledge in hospitals, clinics, and 
healthcare  scenarios  in  general,  to  easily  exchange  information  amongst  patients, 
doctors, nurses, and anyone that has some knowledge available in the LAN range to 
exchange. 

7 

Special Thanks 

To  CNPq,  CAPES  and  FAPERJ  for  the  scholarships  and  to  Microsoft  Research  for 
their funding of the project “Temporal Social Networks and Knowledge Dissemination 
 for  Healthcares”  (LACCIR,  R1210LAC002),  in  collaboration  with  Federal   
University of Rio de Janeiro, University of Chile and CICESE. 

 

An Integrated Environment to Aid Knowledge Exchange and Collaboration 

437 

References 

1.  Dutta, S., Mia, I.: The global information technology report 2008–2009: mobility in a networked 
world. World Economic Forum & INSEAD (2009) 

2.  Pierre, L.: Cyberculture - University of Minnesota Press (October 2001) 
3.  Levy, S.: Making the Ultimate Map. In: Newsweek, pp. 56–58 (June 2004) 
4.  Vera, R., Ochoa, S.F., Aldunate, R.G.: EDIPS: an Easy to Deploy Indoor Positioning System 
 to  support  loosely  coupled  mobile  work.  Personal  and  Ubiquitous  Computing  Archive 
15(4), 365–376 (2011) 

5.  Souza, D.S., Fogaça, G., Silveira, P.C., Oliveira, J., Souza, J.M.: MEK: Uma abordagem 
oportunística para disseminação colaborativa do conhecimento. In: VIII Simpósio Brasileiro 
de Sistemas Colaborativos, pp. 145–151 (2011) (in Portuguese) 

6.  Oh, H., Rizo, C., Enkin, M., Jadad, A., Phil, D.: What Is eHealth: A Systematic Review of 

Published Definitions. J. Med. Internet Res. 7, e1 (2005) 

7.  Wyatt, J.C., Liu, J.L.Y.: Basic concepts in medical informatics. J. Epidemiol Community 

Health 56, 808–812 (2002) 

8.  Eysenbach, G.: What is eHealth? J. Med. Internet Res. 3, e20 (2001) 
9.  Yunkap Kwankam, S.: What eHealth can offer? Bull. World Health Organ. 82, 800–802 

(2004) 

10.  Tachakra, S., Wang, X.H., Istepanian, R.S.H., Song, Y.H.: Mobile eHealth: The Unwired 
Evolution of Telemedicine. Telemed. J. E. Health 9, 247–257 (2003); Alis C., Rosario C. 
Jr.,  Buenaobra  B.,  Blanca  C.M.:  Lifelink:  3G  Based  Mobile  Telemedicine  System.  Telemed.
 J. E. Health 15, 241–247 (2009) 

11.  Choi, J., Yoo, S., Park, H., Chun, J.: MobileMed: A PDA-Based Mobile Clinical Information 
System. IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed. 10, 627–635 (2006) 

12.  Fontecha, J., Hervás, R., Sánchez, L., Navarro, F.J., Bravo, J.: A proposal for elderly frailty 
detection by using accelerometer-enabled smartphones. In: 5th International Symposium 
of Ubiquitous Computing and Place Intelligence (2011) 

13.  Rodríguez-Covili,  J.F.,  Ochoa,  S.F.,  Pino,  J.A.,  Messeguer,  R.,  Medina,  E.,  Royo,  D.: 
HLMP API: a software library to support the development of mobile collaborative applications.
 In: 14th International Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work in Design,
 pp. 479–484. IEEE Press (2010) 

14.  CNPq Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico, 

http://www.cnpq.br/   

15.  Herskovic, V., Ochoa, S.F., Pino, J.A., Neyem, A.: General requirements to design mobile 
shared workspaces. In: 12th International Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work in Design, pp. 582–587. IEEE Press (2008) 

 
 

