Support Communication and Intercultural
Adjustment of Exchange Students Based

on the AUM Theory

Gustavo Zurita1, Nelson Baloian2(&), José A. Pino2,

and Sergio Peñaﬁel2

1 Management Control and Information Systems Department,

Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile

2 Department of Computer Science, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile

gzurita@fen.uchile.cl

{nbaloian,jpino,spenaﬁe}@dcc.uchile.cl

Abstract. People who have to insert and adapt themselves to a different culture
than the one where they grew up usually experience feelings related to anxiety
and uncertainty. This is exactly the situation of the students who decide to go
abroad to continue their education or make an internship in a foreign country.
The number of these students has been constantly increasing during the last
years. In order to better adapt themselves to the new culture they are confronted
with the Anxiety/Uncertainty Model, states that they have to manage the levels
of anxiety and uncertainty in order to communicate effectively with local students 
and teachers. According to the literature, an effective communication and
intercultural adjustment of the foreign students has a direct impact on their
academic performance. Therefore, it is a relevant task to support them in this
process. This work introduces a geo-collaborative application called EMHC (for
Exploring My Host Country) which run son mobile devices and allows
exchange students to access contextual information as well as information about
cultural behavior which could help them to manage their anxiety and uncertainty
levels, thus improving their ability to adapt themselves to the new cultural
environment. A preliminary evaluation of the EMHC was performed with a
small number of exchange students of a Business School, obtaining encouraging
results.

Keywords: Geo-collaboration  Collaboration through social media



Intercultural adjustment

1 Introduction

The rise in internationally mobile students reﬂects growing university enrolment
around the world. In 2013, over 4.1 million students went abroad to study, up from 2
million in 2000, representing 1.8 % of all tertiary enrolments or 2 in 100 students
globally. Central Asia, home to the most mobile student population, has experienced a
steady rise in the number of students studying abroad. This group grew from 67,300 in
2003 to 165,542 in 2013, with the outbound mobility ratio more than doubling from

© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
T. Yuizono et al. (Eds.): CRIWG 2016, LNCS 9848, pp. 50–64, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-44799-5_5

Support Communication and Intercultural Adjustment

51

3.5 % to 7.6 %, [1]. This means that an increasing number of students need to acquire,
experiment and practice social abilities which will help to adapt themselves to the
culture of the host county. These abilities are very much the same which are required to
any professional of the 21st century [2–4].

Among the abilities of the 21st century [3, 4], a very important one is the ability to
communicate and interact in intercultural situations, which are the same needed by
foreign students in order to achieve the intercultural adjustment in the host country.
Particularly, business and management schools around the world largely agree that the
development of communication, interaction, teamwork and intercultural adjustment are
important competences. Due to this, they have been included in the international
standards of accreditation by Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business
(AACSB), [5]. In 2013 the AACSB [4], deﬁned standards for undergraduate and
graduate programs in for developing the following abilities: (a) communicating with
others (locals or foreign) and teamwork in intercultural settings; and (b) being successful 
in the intercultural adjustment with the aim of acquiring knowledge and skills to
perform in today’s globalized world.

Effective communication and intercultural adjustment of foreign students are full of
challenges: cultural aspects associated to communication patterns, language barriers,
feelings of isolation and loneliness, and even discrimination are just a few example of
the experiences which hinder the communication with local people (including their
teachers), achieve an intercultural foreign student may face when trying to perform
successfully in the new environment [6]. According to [7], there is a positive correlation 
between the intercultural adjustment and the academic performance of a foreign
student, which means, the better the adjustment of the student to the culture of the host
country, the better will be the academic performance. Some studies suggest that having
good friends with mates of the same culture as well as the foreign one help to reduce
homesickness feelings [8]; also integrating a student association, fraternity or sport
team positively impacts the student’s social integration and intercultural adjustment,
which leads to a better academic performance [9].

For all these reasons we consider supporting effective communication and intercultural 
adjustment of foreign students a relevant task.

Gudykunst [10, 11], introduced his Anxiety/Uncertainty Management (AUM) theory,
 which states that anxiety and uncertainty are critical factors inﬂuencing communication 
and intercultural adjustment. The theory states that certain levels of anxiety
uncertainty are necessary in order to awake the interest of an individual to discover a
new environment and culture but not high enough to scare her/him.

Based on our previous experience developing collaborative application for supporting 
decision [12], urban planning [13], learning activities in real contexts (situated
learning) [14, 15], all them using geo-referenced information over maps, we developed
an application based on the AUM theory called “Exploring My Host Country”
(EMHC). The application basically supports the foreign students’ process of adaptation
to the host country by providing her/him with important and accurate geo-referenced
information which is contributed collaboratively by other foreign or local students.
Some of this application’s characteristics are mobility (since it can run on Smartphones
and Tablets), and positioning (using the device’s GPS). The main differences this
platform has with other tourism-oriented social networking sites (like TripAdvisor) is

52

G. Zurita et al.

that this one stresses the communication among users, not only in terms of allowing
dialogues between two or chats between many users but also helping the user to ﬁnd
contributions from people they would trust better or are more keen to ask questions. For
example, one may prefer contributions from local people while another would prefer
people of the same age, gender or nationality. Communicating with people they trust
(which may be different when searching for one or another kind of information) can
reduce the uncertainty and anxiety while trying to get acquainted with a new culture
and environment.

The rest of the paper is organized the following way: Sect. 2 reviews the relevant
literature about collaborative applications using geo-referencing in order to state that
this problem has not been tackled using this approach yet. It also shows the relevance
of geo-localized information to improve the communication. Section 3 explain the
AUM theory in detail, especially how it is used to overcome the intercultural adjustment 
of people living in a foreign culture. Section 4 uses the axioms of the AUM
theory in order to identify the basic design principles and functionalities of the EMHC
application. Section 5 describes the application in detail. In Sect. 6 we present a preliminary 
evaluation of the application and Sect. 7 concludes the paper.

2 Geosocial Media and Collaboration

According to [16], a Geographic Information System (GIS) is viewed as an inherently
interdisciplinary endeavor in which disciplines operated with a variety of scientiﬁc
paradigms. It may involve collaborative exploration or mapping meaningful representations 
and/or interpreting geographically related data, or making geospatial decisions
collaboratively in various situations like crisis management [17], decision making [12],
collaboratively planning [13], collaboratively deﬁning strategies [18], or conducting
collaborative educational activities by geo-referencing information in authentic contexts
and physical locations, where students can establish signiﬁcant cognitive relationships
between what was understood inside the classroom and what is visualized in a real
context [13–15, 19]. Among the wide range of self-stated purposes for the GIS initiatives 
examined, Elwood et al. [20] discerned three primary groupings: initiatives primarily 
oriented toward mapping user-contributed information (geovisualization, 14 %);
initiatives oriented toward capturing, compiling, and integrating geotagged content, data
generated through location-based services, and geo-locational information for place
names (geoinformation, 51 %); and initiatives that allow users to share geo-located
media with others in their professional or social networks (geosocial, 35 %).

Budhathoki and Haythornthwaite [21], showed in a comprehensive study which
criteria increase the contributor motivation in geosocial media projects; they identiﬁed
intrinsic motivations as altruism,
learning/personal enrichment, selfexpression;
 and extrinsic motivations as social reward/relations, career, personal reputation,
 community.

recreation,

According to [22], the ubiquitous usage of location-enabled devices, such as
smartphones, allows citizens to share their geographic information on a number of
selected geosocial media applications over maps in online portals, in order to mark and
annotate the geographical characteristics or to add geographic location information to

Support Communication and Intercultural Adjustment

53

photographs, videos, audio, etc. The use of multiple geosocial media sources for
information extraction and knowledge generation in various application domains is a
challenging task, both in terms of data management and analysis and in terms of
knowledge production. Croitoru et al. [23], states there is a growing interest to apply
these technologies to social and politics.

Form the analysis of the reviewed literature we can conclude there is growing
interest for geospatial media applications which are developed for various contexts,
purposes and scenarios. In some cases they are meant for speciﬁc purposes and in other
they are designed for general use, like Waze and Foursquare. These applications use
georeferenced information over maps and make frequently use of the Global Positioning 
System (GPS) of mobile devices. The information that should be conveyed (for
whatever purpose) is stored in order to be used in a place (the same one or another)
describing the place where something interesting is located or something happened. We
consider that geo-localization information adds value to the shared information which
can be used for an effective communication in the scenario of intercultural adjustment
of foreign students having to adapt
themselves to a new physical and cultural
environment.

3 AUM: Anxiety/Uncertainly Management Theory

AUM theory has been applied to improve communication quality of people adjusting
themselves to life in new cultures, [10, 11]. It has also been applied to improve
cross-cultural
to characterize culturaldependent 
communication styles [11], and for studying cases of exchange students at
schools [24].

interpersonal and intergroup relationships,

According to [10], strangers have uncertainty about host’s attitudes, feelings,
beliefs, values and behaviors. Strangers need to be able to predict which of several
alternative behavior patterns hosts’ will employ. Strangers also need to be able to
explain hosts, attitudes, feelings and behaviors. Whenever strangers try to ﬁgure out
why hosts behaved the way they did, strangers are engaging in explanatory uncertainty
reduction. When strangers communicate with hosts, strangers not only experience
uncertainty, they also experience anxiety (usually based on negative expectations, is the
affective (emotional) equivalent of uncertainty). Anxiety is the tension, feelings of
being uneasy, or apprehension strangers have about what will happen when they
communicate with hosts. To adjust to another culture, strangers do not want to try to
totally reduce their anxiety and uncertainty. At the same time, strangers cannot communicate 
effectively with hosts if their uncertainty and anxiety are too high. If
uncertainty is too high, strangers cannot accurately interpret hosts’ messages or make
accurate predictions about hosts’ behaviors. When anxiety is too high, strangers
communicate on automatic pilot and interpret hosts’ behaviors using their own cultural
frames of reference. Also, when anxiety is too high, the way foreigner people process
information is very simple, thereby limiting their abilities to predict hosts’ behavior.
When uncertainty is too low, strangers become over-conﬁdent that they understand
hosts’ behaviors and do not question whether their predictions are accurate. When
anxiety is too low, strangers are not motivated to communicate with hosts. If strangers’

54

G. Zurita et al.

Fig. 1. A schema of the basic AUM theory proposed by [10].

anxiety is high, they must cognitively manage their anxiety to communicate effectively
and adjust to the host cultures. Managing anxiety requires that strangers become
mindful (i.e., think about our communication and continually work at changing what
we do in order to become more effective). Mindfulness is the way that in-group
members and strangers can reduce their anxiety and uncertainty to optimum levels.
When strangers have managed their anxiety, they need to try to develop accurate
predictions and explanations for hosts’ behaviors. When strangers communicate on
automatic pilot, they predict and interpret hosts’ behaviors using their own frames of
reference. When strangers are mindful, in contrast, they are open to new information
and aware of alternative perspectives, and they can make accurate predictions.

In AUM theory, managing uncertainty and anxiety are the “basic causes” of
strangers’ effective communication with hosts and intercultural adjustment, while
“superﬁcial causes” inﬂuence the amount of uncertainty and anxiety foreign people
experience. The amount of uncertainty and anxiety strangers experience in their
interactions with hosts is a function of many superﬁcial causes; e.g. self-concepts,
motivation, reactions to hosts, social categorization, situational processes, and connections 
with hosts. Figure 1 provides a summary of the basic theory.

AUM theory presents 96 axioms explaining the “superﬁcial causes” and how they
affect or relate to the “basic causes” (i.e. anxiety and uncertainty), [10]. The next
section explains how “basic causes” and some axioms of the “superﬁcial causes” have
been used as fundamental design principles of EMHC.

Support Communication and Intercultural Adjustment

55

4 Design Principles of EMHC Based on AUM Theory

The design principles of EMHC identiﬁed in this section are based on the “basic
causes” and “superﬁcial causes” of the AUM theory. EMHC has been designed with
the aim of facilitating the generation of geo-referenced contextualized and relevant
information. This information will be shared by the foreign and local students in order
to maintain the levels of anxiety and uncertainty of foreign students at adequate levels
to achieve the intercultural adjustment.

Table 1 shows the most relevant axioms of the AUM theory which were used to state
the principle designs of EMHC, and consequently, identify the relevant functionalities
(RF), which are described in detail in Sect. 5. From our point of view other axioms could
also have been selected to be associated with design principles and functionalities,

Table 1. “Basic causes” and “superﬁcial causes” axioms of the AUM theory [10], used to state
the design principles of EMHC classiﬁed as relevant functionalities (RF) described in Sect. 5.
“Basic causes”: Ax. 38, 29, and 40 for “anxiety, uncertainty, mindfulness and effective
communication”. “Superﬁcial causes”: Ax. 66(19) for “Social Categorization of Hosts”, Ax. 26,
27, 28 and 30 for “Situational Processes”, Ax. 34, 35, 36 and 37 for “Connections with Hosts”.
Axioms
Ax. 38. An increase in our ability to gather
appropriate information about hosts will
produce an increase in our ability to
accurately predict their behavior

EMHC design principles
RF2. RF3. RF4. RF5. The generated, shared
or commented information about customs
of local people together with the search
functionalities should improve the capacity
to predict the behavior of local people

Ax. 39. An increase in our ability to describe
hosts’ behavior will produce an increase in
our ability to accurately predict their
behavior

Ax. 40. An increase in our understanding the

host culture’s stocks of knowledge will
produce an increase in our ability to
manage our anxiety and our ability to
accurately predict hosts’ behavior

Ax. 34. An increase in the quantity and
quality of our contact with hosts will
produce a decrease in our anxiety and an
increase in our ability to accurately predict
their behavior

RF2. RF3. RF4. The information generated
by local and foreign people regarding the
behavior of local people will improve the
prediction ability of foreigners about the
behavior of locals

RF2. RF4. RF6. The information

contextualized with geo-localization
(through check-in functionality, see
Sect. 5) along with brief explanations to
better understand the meaning of certain
customs in speciﬁc places will lower the
anxiety of foreigner students

RF2. RF4. RF6. The generation, review,
classiﬁcation of the geo-referenced and
making comments about the published
information should produce a decrease in
our anxiety and an increase foreign
students’ ability to accurately predict their
behavior. The check-in functionality
should increase the precision and therefore
the quality of the information

(Continued)

56

G. Zurita et al.

Table 1.

(Continued)

Axioms
Ax. 35. An increase in our interdependence
with hosts will produce a decrease in our
anxiety and an increase in our conﬁdence
in predicting their behavior

Ax. 36. An increase in the intimacy of our

relationships with hosts will produce a
decrease in our anxiety and an increase in
our conﬁdence in predicting their behavior

Ax. 37. An increase in the networks we share
with hosts will produce a decrease in our
anxiety and an increase in our conﬁdence
in predicting their behavior

Ax. 66(19). An increase in our understanding
of similarities and differences between our
culture and host’ culture will produce an
increase in our ability to manage our
anxiety and our ability to accurately
predict their behavior

Ax. 26. An increase in the complexity of our
scripts for communicating with hosts will
produce a decrease in our anxiety and an
increase in our conﬁdence in predicting
their behavior

Ax. 27. An increase in the informality of the
situation in which we are communicating
with hosts will produce a decrease in our
anxiety and an increase in our conﬁdence
in predicting their behavior

EMHC design principles
RF1, RF2. RF3. RF4. Creating sessions

where students can share information with
locals, as well as generating and reviewing,
rating, and alert other students about the
comments associated to the information
decrease anxiety and an increase
conﬁdence in predicting locals’ behavior

RF4. RF6. The comments made to the
information posted by other local or
foreigners may serve to express personal
points of view increasing the intimacy of
the relationships

RF1. RF2. RF3. RF4. Sharing information

with locals and other foreigners will
promote foreign students to be part of local
networks, promoting positive and active
attitudes among them

RF2. RF3. RF4. The shared information

concerning cultural patterns could in some
cases allow comparing and evaluating
similarities between local and foreign
customs

RF4. The information about behavior

patterns of local people posted by locals
will offer foreign students scripts for
communicating with hosts

RF4. Comments associated to the

geo-referenced information posted by local
and foreign people will allow an informal
communication between them which
should decrease in anxiety and an increase
in conﬁdence in predicting their behavior

Ax. 28. An increase in the cooperative

RF1. RF2. RF3. RF4. The information

structure of the goals on which we work
with hosts will produce a decrease in our
anxiety and an increase in our conﬁdence
in predicting their behavior

shared between foreign and local students
generates a collaborative process, expected
to result in an increase in the conﬁdence of
foreign students in predicting locals’
behavior

Ax. 30. An increase in the percentage of

RF1. Collaboration (through creating,

members of our culture present in a
situation when we interact with hosts will
produce a decrease in our anxiety

commenting, and sharing information)
between users identiﬁed as coming from
the same country; will allow exchange
students decrease their anxiety, as they
share their experience with members of
their own culture

Support Communication and Intercultural Adjustment

57

however, they would not generate other functionalities than those already identiﬁed and
therefore are not mentioned in this paper.

4.1 Content of the Generated, Shared and/or Commented Information

EMHC will contain geo-referenced information about the host city about attractions,
such as places to stay, restaurants, entertainment, transport, services, shopping, etc.; on
which it is expected to describe (both by foreigners and the local) how to proceed in
certain circumstances, explain basic communication patterns, reporting speciﬁc locations,
 make recommendations, etc.

By accessing this information, foreign students will be aware of the existence of
relevant aspects to know in order to predict the behavior of local people. Foreign and
local students can comment on the geo-referenced information iteratively and openly
share it with all members invited to a session. Members of a session are invited by the
creator of the session which may be foreign or local students. In EMHC, users can
create multiple sessions for various purposes, each of which may have different
members; for example, to share information on local customs, recreational areas,
recommended to eat, of aspects related to studies or general purpose sites.

While posting comments, EMHC users can create alerts for speciﬁc persons who they
think will be interested in that post. Comments with alerts can be used to address questions 
to certain people or share information with foreign students which they know are
interested in the information posted. Through comments to the geo-referenced information,
 foreign students can meet their levels of awareness and/or understanding of what
usually happens or do in certain places, achieving mindfulness; i.e. foreigners achieve
optimal levels of uncertainty and anxiety leading to their intercultural adjustment.

4.2 Format of the Information to Be Generated, Shared

and/or Commented

The geo-referenced information will be delivered in capsules of information, e.g. a
microblogging style, in order not to overwhelm students with long texts, which could
cause even more anxiety. EMHC implements a reward system since users will be asked
to rate the usefulness of information with a scoring system. It is expected that this
feedback will motivate local and foreign users to use of the application. The
geo-referencing of information will be assisted by the use of GPS devices where the
application runs. Also, the geo-localized information to be shared may be associated
with the record that it was produced in the same place through the “check-in” option.
This option is implemented because information generated with the “check-in” option
has a greater context value than the geo-referenced information produced remotely, as
it has a record that can be associated with greater veracity and accuracy.

58

G. Zurita et al.

5 Description of the EMHC Application

EMHC application has been developed with HTML5, thus users only need a device
(Smartphone, Tablets) with any browser and an Internet connection to run it. Users may
generate a geo-referenced information at the same place (using mobile devices) or
remotely (using desktop computers, notebooks or laptops). After the information is
published by its author, all users participating in the session can see, associate comments 
and/or rate it. The application has been designed for supporting foreign exchange
students at a Business Faculty in a University.

This section describes the six relevant functionalities (RF) of EMHC, which were
derived using the “basic causes” and “superﬁcial causes” of the AUM theory described
in the previous section.

RF1. Create Sessions. In EMHC users may participate in a public session which has
been foreseen to be managed by staff members dedicated to support foreign people in
an institution, which in the case of our scenario is the ofﬁce in charge of supporting
exchange students. Staff members publish information of general interest for these
students like locations of important services, where to buy at convenient prices, or
where are the students’ amusement quarters. Foreign or local students may create

Fig. 2. The EMHC interface as shown when running on a Tablet, Desktop Computer,
Notebook, or Laptop. The ﬁgure shows the georeferenced places over the map and the associated
information of each one on the table listing them at the right. The green mark on the map
displaying the label “bank” means the user has currently selected it. (Color ﬁgure online)

Support Communication and Intercultural Adjustment

59

sessions for special interests, like for students speaking a certain language or practicing
a certain sport, or a certain hobby to share information about that. Figure 2 shows a
session called “Interchange Students” (written on the label at the upper-right corner of
the map shown by the application’s interface) which contains information created by
the support staff for a prelaminar evaluation of the application.

RF2. Generating Geo-Referenced Information. Users may create geo-referenced
marks, regions or paths on a map corresponding to locations of interest with information
to share with all members of a session. The added information added should contain at
least a title. An associated description and images are optional. The published information 
may also be associated to one or more categories accommodation, restaurant &
coffee, commerce, culture, sports, entertainment, foreign, family, ﬁnances, properties,
religion, health, security, public services, transport, tourism, public utility, volunteering.
It is possible to “ﬁne tune” the location of marks when they are close to a Street
thanks to Google-Maps’ Street-View. By activating Street-View (inside the applica-
tion) users can see 360° images of the streets and the buildings nearby, including the
mark that they have put on the map, which can be conveniently moved to pose it on a
certain building entrance, statue, corner, bench, etc. thus giving in this way more
context information to the post.

Fig. 3. The EMHC interface as shown when running on a Tablet, Desktop Computer,
Notebook, or Laptop. The ﬁgure shows a polygon geo-referencing an area currently selected by
the user. At the right the information associated to this element is displayed: title (“korean
ghetto”), a description (“watch out”), and a couple of comments emitted by other users. The stars
allow users to rate the contribution assigning 1to 7 stars. In this case it has 0 starts, which means
it has not been rated yet.

60

G. Zurita et al.

Fig. 4. View of EMHC user interface running on a Smartphone. The ﬁgure left shows
information searching options. The ﬁgure at the right shows a path with a sequence of three
entries labelled “Museums Sequence”. The points are labeled with the numbers 1, 2 and 3
showing the order of the sequence.

In order to geo-reference regions the user can chose circles, polygons, rectangles or
lines. However, these are not shown on Google-Maps’ Street-view. Figure 3 shows a
geo-referenced polygon. In order to increase the quality and quantity of the shared
information it is also possible to use polylines to geo-references of places (see Fig. 4).
This option is useful when there is the wish to inform about a tourist route or recommend 
a way to go from one place to another.

RF3. Reading Geo-Referenced Information. By default, all geo-referenced inputs
made by users of the current session are displayed as a list (see the right side of Fig. 2).
When clicking over the name of an item of this list, the geo-referenced element is
immediately displayed on the map with green color and a label on it (as shown with
“bank” on Fig. 2), centering the map on the geo-location of the selected element and
zooming to show the element and its surrounding context. The list can be shown in three
different ways: (a) the list contains all entries showing their title, author, creation date,
rating obtained and category to which it belongs (see the list of places geo-referenced to
the right of the interface EMHC in Fig. 2), (b) the list contains only those elements
created by the user showing their title, creation date, number of times all users visited the
geo-referencing, the assigned rating, the number of comments made, and whether it was
created with the check-in functionality; (c) the list contains all elements created by all
users in the current session, showing title, creation date, the number of times that all user
visited the geo-referencing, the average rate, the number of comments received by all
users, and whether it was or not created with the check-in functionality.

Support Communication and Intercultural Adjustment

61

For the three variants the lists may be ordered by any of the attributes shown, that

is, the title, date, rating, comments received, etc.

RF4. Commenting on, Rating and Alerting about Contributions. For entering a
comment associated to a certain geo-referenced element it must be selected either using
the list or the map. Comments may include pictures. The length of the comments is
limited in order to avoid having large entries which would discourage people to read
them. All users of the session may comment and/or answer to previous entered comments 
(see right of Fig. 3). Contributions can be rated with 1 to 7 stars, with 7 being the
highest score according to the usefulness and accuracy of the information provided.
The rate shown for each entry corresponds to the average of all ratings received.

Optionally, alerts may be sent to one or more users of the session every time a user
posts a comment. These alerts are reported to the receiver user with a number on the
menu item icon with the shape of an envelope (see Fig. 3.); which when activated,
displays a list of all received alerts (which are marked with a number corresponding to
the number of alerts received). By choosing one of these alerts, all information corresponding 
to the associated element is displayed, along with its location on the map.

RF5. Information Search in EMHC and Google-Maps. Searching for contributions
having certain information which the user is looking for may be done in two ways:
(a) by navigating on the map, supported by zoom-in and zoom-out options; that is, a
search for geo-referenced elements by location; (b) through the simple and advanced
search options which implement a query-by-example interface allowing the search
based on the entries’ attributes like author’s user name, gender, nationality, language
(or languages) that the author speaks. It also possible to search for contributions made
within a range of dates (see EMHC interface on the left of Fig. 4).

RF6. Check-in Functionality and Comments. The check-in option can be optionally
used by a user in order to communicate she was in (in case of areas) or very near (in
case of marks and lines) the position of a geo-referenced contribution. It can also be
used to by a user to communicate that she was on site when making a comment
associated to a geo-referenced contribution. When the check-in button located at the
bottom of EMHC is pressed, the generated geo-referenced contribution acquires the
geographical location information of the place where this was created.

6 EMHC Initial Evaluation

There are several dimensions in which this tool could be evaluated, such as usability
and suitability, but also from perspectives such as technology adoption. Of course, it is
also a matter of available resources, since a comprehensive evaluation may be very
expensive [25].

An opportunity for initially trying and evaluating EMHC was an international
school organized by the Faculty of Economics and Business of the University of Chile
in Santiago in 2016. A large number of graduate students from a variety of countries
attended that school. So, it appeared natural to test a system prototype with those
students.

62

G. Zurita et al.

Therefore, a few days after the students had arrived to Santiago, they were invited
to a session in which the system was presented. Then, the students could play with
EMHC installed in some computers. Finally, they were asked to ﬁll a questionnaire.
Five students from Europe, two from North America and one from Asia answered the
questionnaire. We analyze their answers below.

Half of the students felt they had some difﬁculties to interact with people from the
host country. This conﬁrms one of the assumptions of our research. By contrast, all the
respondents found “easy” or “very easy” to interact with their classmates.

Concerning their initial opinions on the prototype, 3 students answered the application 
had some value, 3 said the application should be useful, and one student said it
would be very useful. All students also said they would read contributions made by
peers. However, about half of the students did not think they would make contributions.
Another question concerned the utility of the geographic localization of comments.
There were four options to answer: very useful, somehow useful, not too useful, a
nuisance. About half of the students answered “very useful” and the other half said it
was “somehow useful”.

Finally, the questionnaire had a space for giving open opinions. Some of the students
mentioned they would have liked to have the phone version of the system available (they
just tried the PC prototype). One student mentioned the system should look similar to
other systems (like Google reviews or TripAdvisor) in order “not to discourage people
who are not tech friendly”; we see here a technology adoption oriented advice.

All

in all,

the respondents had a positive initial evaluation of the prototype.
However, we should take into account they are young educated adults, who typically
are users of technology. The results could have been different with senior adults, for
example. On the other hand, perhaps senior adults would have more anxiety about a
foreign country than young adults. We certainly need additional evaluation and with
the smartphone version as well.

7 Conclusions

The reviewed literature shows there is transient problem with people arriving to visit a
new country: the anxiety and difﬁculties concerning the relationships with local people
at the beginning. Different culture, language, way of interaction, etc. are typical barriers
to a relaxed life during that period. We propose a technological support based on a kind
of social network: people in similar situation sharing their tips on how to visit a city.
People who have already passed the same experience can also join the network as well
as good willing hosts. The design of our technological support, EMHC, incorporates
geo-localization as a way of simplifying and making comments and suggestions more
visually-oriented.

The initial evaluation of the tool shows a group of graduate students in a situation
like the target of this research found it appropriate and useful. However, further validation 
is needed and with other types of visitors.

Acknowledgement. This paper was partially funded by Fondecyt 1161200.

Support Communication and Intercultural Adjustment

63

References

1. Unesco: Global Flow of Tertiary-Level Students (2016). http://www.uis.unesco.org/

Education/Pages/international-student-ﬂow-viz.aspx. Accessed 2 June 2016

2. ACARA: General Capabilities in the Australian Curriculum (2014). http://www.australian

curriculum.edu.au/generalcapabilities/pdf/overview. Accessed 07 April 2016

3. Grifﬁn, P., McGaw, B., Care, E.: Assessment and Teaching of 21st Century Skills. Springer,

Netherlands (2012)

4. AACSB: Standard 9. Curriculum content is appropriate to general expectations for the
(2013). http://www.aacsb.edu/accreditation/

degree program type and learning goal.
standards/2013-business/learning-and-teaching/standard9.aspx. Accessed 20 April 2015

5. AACSB: Teaching Design for Creativity and Innovation 2015. http://www.aacsb.edu/en/
events/Seminars/curriculum-development-series/design-thinking.aspx. Accessed 20 April
2015

6. Lee, J.: International student experiences: neo-racism and discrimination. Int. High. Educ.

44, 3–5 (2015)

7. Rienties, B., et al.: Understanding academic performance of international students: the role

of ethnicity, academic and social integration. High. Educ. 63(6), 685–700 (2012)

8. Hendrickson, B., Rosen, D., Aune, R.K.: An analysis of friendship networks, social
Int.

connectedness, homesickness, and satisfaction levels of
J. Intercultural Relat. 35(3), 281–295 (2011)

international

students.

9. Russell, J., Rosenthal, D., Thomson, G.: The international student experience: three styles of

adaptation. High. Educ. 60(2), 235–249 (2010)

10. Gudykunst, W.B.: Applying anxiety uncertainty management (AUM) theory to intercultural

adjustment training. Int. J. Intercultural Relat. 22(2), 227–250 (1998)

11. Gudykunst, W.B., Nishida, T.: Anxiety, uncertainty, and perceived effectiveness of
communication across relationships and cultures. Int. J. Intercultural Relat. 25(1), 55–71
(2001)

12. Antunes, P., et al.: Integrating decision-making support in geocollaboration tools. Group

Decis. Negot. 23(2), 211–233 (2014)

13. Zurita, G., Baloian, N.: Mobile, collaborative situated knowledge creation for urban planning.

Sensors 12(5), 6218–6243 (2012)

14. Zurita, G., Baloian, N.: Context, patterns and geo-collaboration to support situated learning.
In: Bravo, J., López-de-Ipiña, D., Moya, F. (eds.) UCAmI 2012. LNCS, vol. 7656, pp. 503–
511. Springer, Heidelberg (2012)

15. Zurita, G., Baloian, N.: Using geo-collaboration and microblogging to support learning:
identifying problems and opportunities for technological business. In: Antunes, P., Gerosa,
M.A., Sylvester, A., Vassileva, J., de Vreede, G.-J. (eds.) CRIWG 2013. LNCS, vol. 8224,
pp. 215–232. Springer, Heidelberg (2013)

16. Mark, D.M.: Geographic information science: deﬁning the ﬁeld. Found. Geogr. Inf. Sci. 1,

3–18 (2003)

17. Folino, G., et al.: A grid portal for solving geoscience problems using distributed knowledge

discovery services. Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 26(1), 87–96 (2010)

18. MacEachren, A.M., et al.: Enabling collaborative geoinformation access and decisionmaking 
through a natural, multimodal interface. Int. J. Geogr. Inf. Sci. 19(3), 293–317 (2005)
19. Silva, M.J., et al.: Sensing the schoolyard: using senses and sensors to assess georeferenced
environmental dimensions. In: Proceedings of the 1st International Conference and Exhibition
on Computing for Geospatial Research and Application. ACM (2010)

64

G. Zurita et al.

20. Elwood, S., Goodchild, M.F., Sui, D.Z.: Researching volunteered geographic information:
spatial data, geographic research, and new social practice. Ann. Assoc. Am. Geogr. 102(3),
571–590 (2012)

21. Budhathoki, N.R., Haythornthwaite, C.: Motivation for open collaboration crowd and
community models and the case of OpenStreetMap. Am. Behav. Sci. 57(5), 548–575 (2013)
22. Neis, P., Zielstra, D.: Recent developments and future trends in volunteered geographic

information research: the case of OpenStreetMap. Future Internet 6(1), 76–106 (2014)

23. Croitoru, A., et al.: Geosocial gauge: a system prototype for knowledge discovery from

social media. Int. J. Geogr. Inf. Sci. 27(12), 2483–2508 (2013)

24. Caldwell, K.: Sprechen sie… What? Anxiety/Uncertainty Management

in a German

American School (2012)

25. Antunes, P., et al.: Structuring dimensions for collaborative systems evaluation. ACM

Comput. Surv. (CSUR) 44(2), 8 (2012)

