Multimed Tools Appl (2007) 32:137–138
DOI 10.1007/s11042-006-0063-x

GUEST EDITORIAL

Special issue on groupware and multimedia

José A. Pino & Jesus Favela

Published online: 4 November 2006
# Springer Science + Business Media, LLC 2006

This special issue includes four papers dealing with some of the ways in which multimedia
technology contributes to the development of groupware systems. The papers have been
selected from the articles presented at the 10th International Workshop on Groupware
(CRIWG ‘03), held in Autrans, France in the fall of 2003. We selected papers being both of
high quality and related to multimedia. The authors of the selected papers were invited to
produce extended versions of these manuscripts, which underwent two rounds of blind
reviewing by a committee including members of the JMTA editorial board and the CRIWG
program committee.

The development of multimedia groupware systems is a demanding task given that these
systems often need to deal with issues associated to different areas of expertise, such as
distributed systems, human–computer interaction, and networking. Facing such technical
challenges often gets in the way of designers’ creativity. In the paper “Toolkits and interface
creativity,” Greenberg describes his experience in the use of toolkits to foster the creativity
of designers of novel user interfaces. His work has focused on providing designers with
high-level development tools that can help them iterate through several designs via rapid
prototyping and testing of design ideas.

In “Collaboration in a multi-user game:

impacts of an awareness tool on mutual
modeling,” Nova, Wehrle, Goslin, Bourquin and Dillenbourg present an empirical
evaluation of a multimedia groupware game aimed at measuring the effect of awareness
tools on task performance and mutual modeling. Mutual modeling refers to the
representation an individual builds of what his partner knows. Mutual modeling becomes
important when partners work together on a common task, and it can be hampered by
distance. Although awareness is a topic to which considerable attention has been paid in the
groupware literature, few empirical studies have been conducted on the actual effects of

J. A. Pino (*)
Departamento de Ciencias de la Computación, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile
e-mail: jpino@dcc.uchile.cl

J. Favela
Departamento de Ciencias de la Computación, Cicese, Ensada, Mexico
e-mail: favela@cicese.mx

138

Multimed Tools Appl (2007) 32:137–138

awareness tools. Games, the application domain selected for this study, on the other hand,
has been a traditional point of convergence for multimedia and groupware.

The collaborative edition of drawings has been an important application area in
groupware. The development of these systems requires designers to deal with issues of
awareness, access control and multi-user interfaces. In “Supporting multiple viewpoints in
collaborative graphical editing,” Meire, Borges and Araujo propose a versioning
mechanism to let collaborators manage multiple viewpoints of
the artifact being
constructed. The versioning mechanism is implemented in a collaborative editor by using
the concept of mask. This allows designers to explore various design options, work in
parallel, and detect and deal with conflicting situations. The authors provide evidence of the
usefulness of this approach in coordinating group work.

images. COVE,

In “Collaborative object-oriented visualization environment,” Ryu, Kim, Park, Kwon
and Joeng propose a framework for the collaborative visualization and manipulation of
complex 3-dimensional
in which this approach is
implemented, makes use of a distributed architecture to provide the performance required
for image rendering as well as collaboration services, such as session management and
access control. The architecture provides flexibility by allowing developers to integrate new
visualization applications as plug-ins. Performance results of parallel image rendering are
presented and discussed.

the environment

As illustrated by the research works presented in this special issue, modern information
systems increasingly incorporate multimedia and collaborative technologies. Although
many challenges lie ahead, this collection of papers shows some of the recent advances
made in the convergence of these two fields.

