Cooperative Work for Spatial Decision Making:  

An Emergencies Management Case 

Jonathan Frez1, Nelson Baloian2, Jose A. Pino2, and Gustavo Zurita3 

1 Universidad Diego Portales, Santiago, Chile 

2 Universidad de Chile, Department of Computer Science, Santiago, Chile 

3 Department of Information Systems and Management, Business and Economics Faculty, 

Universidad de Chile, 

Diagonal Paraguay 257, Santiago, Chile 

gzurita@fen.uchile.cl 

Abstract. Geographical Information systems have been frequently used to support 
 decision  processes,  especially  those  involving  emergency  management. 
When planning the measures in case of an emergency experts must evaluate and 
compare  many  scenarios  which  arise  from  different  hypotheses  about  where 
people may be at the time of the emergency and how will they react. This work 
presents a tool which can help a group of experts in generating, visualizing and 
comparing the outcomes of the different hypotheses.    

Keywords: Collaborative decision support, GIS, Emergency management. 

1 

Introduction 

There are many decision problems involving spatial issues that might be solved with 
the help of a GIS. The most recurrent problem can be generally stated in the following 
way:  Find a  suitable area to “do” something. For example, Ghayoumian et al. [3] 
explain how to find locations for constructing artificial water recharge aquifers using 
floods.  In this case, decision makers must be experts on aquifers recharge, but they 
will need historical information and spatial data in order to design a  formula  which 
reflects the correct criteria for selecting the suitable area(s). This formula is used to 
build a suitability map using a GIS. This map typically shows the suitability level on 
each point of the map satisfying the requirements. However in ill-structured problems 
this criterion is complex to build because the goals are not clear and the various decision 
makers will tend to define different goals according to their own knowledge. 

Another difficulty with GIS-based ill-structured problems is that frequently the data 
 available  to  decision  makers  is  unreliable.  In  particular,  data  may  be  incomplete 
(not covering the whole space) and/or uncertain (there are doubts on the data accuracy 
and  veracity).  A  typical  case  in  which  this  situation  occurs  is  in  some  Emergency 
Management response processes [1]. An example of this situation is the people evacuation 
from coastal areas decisions after a strong earthquake; there is the threat of a 
possible tsunami and decision makers must decide the evacuation procedure. Various 
options may be available, but the data to make an easy decision may not be at hand: 
exactly how many people are now in in each portion of the territory? Do they have 

N. Baloian et al. (Eds.): CRIWG 2014, LNCS 8658, pp. 113–120, 2014. 
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014 

114 

J. Frez et al. 

now operating means of transportation (at each location)? Do they have basic supplies 
(water, electricity, gas…) at each location?, etc. 

We have presented a way to deal with incomplete and uncertain spatial data in a 
previous  work [2]. The result is a graphical display of possible values at each location.
 However, this  may  not  be sufficient. The values are  just a consequence of  the 
assumptions  made by one expert. Another expert  may disagree  with  them. We deal 
with  a  further  step  in  the  collaborative  decision-making  process.  Suppose  a  small 
number  of  experts  are  in  a  face-to-face  meeting  and  each  of  them  is  provided  with 
tools for generating and displaying possible data according to their own assumptions 
and hypotheses. Of course, each expert’s data is different from the others’. How could 
they somehow get a tradeoff? That is the problem we begin to treat here.  

2 

Scenario Building 

Geographic  information  is  usually  represented  in  a  discrete  manner,  with  discrete 
geometries  and  deterministic  values.  However,  a  variable  like  temperature  over  a 
period of time becomes a random variable.  Geographical points can be seen as random 
 variables  as  well  because  they  are  mostly  created  using  sampling  procedures 
(e.g.  GPS).  Information  associated  to  the  geometries  of  the  areas  being  represented 
could also have probabilistic and/or epistemic properties, e.g., which is the probability 
that the boundary runs exactly over a certain line?  

The Dempster-Shafer theory [5] proposes to use sets of hypotheses regarding a variable,
 e.g., temperature values in X are always between t1 and t2, associated with a 
probability of being correct.  We explain this theory with an example: Table 1 shows 
mean number of persons values associated to a certain location. We also have a query 
Q = [13-23] looking for locations with more than 13 and less than 23 persons. In this 
case, 3/5 of the locations meet this condition (locations 1 and 3 do not). Now Table 2 
contains a "range" of persons registered for each location. In this case, only 2/5 of the 
locations fully satisfy the condition (positions 4 and 5) and 2/5 more may have a possibility 
to satisfy it (positions 1 and 2). One location does not fall within any interval 
of the query range (position 3). The theory defines three types of answers to queries: 

─  Plausible: the probability the random variable takes values within the query range.  
─  Certain: the probability that the whole range of the distribution of the variable is 

within the range of the query. 

─  Uncertain: no valuable information can be derived from this data. 

Table 1. Location vs persons 

Table 2. Location vs range 

Location 

average #persons  

Location 

#persons range 

1 
2 
3 
4 
5 

 

12 
20 
7 
19 
17 

1 
2 
3 
4 
5 

[9-21] 
[12-23] 
[5-10] 
[17-20] 
[14-22] 

  Cooperative Work for Spatial Decision Making: An Emergencies Management Case 

115 

Using the Dempster-Shafer evaluation, we can compute the hypotheses (Plausibility,
 Certainty and Uncertainty) for each location of Tables 1 and 2. We see the Certainty 
level is 40% and Plausibility level is 80% (Table 3). These values are considered as 
lower  and  upper  bounds  of  possibility,  i.e.  between  40%  and  80%  of  the  locations 
have some possibility to have a similar number of persons to the queried range. Besides 
this information, the theory states that a certain weight should be given to each 
hypothesis. This weight should be assigned by a human expert or a heuristic. Table 4 
shows weights assigned by an expert. 

 

Table 3. Location/Persons D-S 

Table 4. Location/Persons weights 

Loc. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 

Persons 
[10,20] 
[15-25] 
[10-25] 
[17-29] 
[20-32] 

Hypothesis 
Plausible 
Plausible 
Uncertain 
Certain 
Certain 

Persons 
[10,20] 
[15-25] 
[10-25] 
[17-29] 
[20-32] 

Weight 
20% 
15% 
35% 
20% 
10% 

 

 
In this case, since Q = [13-23], the certainty is 30% (20% from location 4 plus 10% 
from  location  5)  and  the  plausibility  is  65%  (20%  from  position  1  plus  15%  from 
position 2 which are plausible, plus 30% from the certain positions 4 and 5). 

Using Dempter-Shafer Theory, the expert can define a set of hypotheses expressing 
his knowledge, e.g., one hypothesis can be “persons are in shops with a 20% of be-
lief” or “persons are in schools or workplaces with a 40% of belief”. We also define 
query hypotheses: “persons are in shops just like in place X,Y”.  The expert can define 
multiple hypotheses in his/her statement, which are combined using Dempster-Shafer 
combination rules. Furthermore, these complex scenarios can be designed by experts 
with no GIS expertise. 

The  result  of  combining  the  hypotheses  with  real  data  and  fuzzy  techniques  for 
spatial  representation,  gives  us  a  suitability  map.  A  suitability  map  typically  shows 
the  suitability  level  on  each  point  of  the  map  that  satisfies  the  requirements;  in  our 
case,  it  shows  the  belief  degree  of  the  hypothesis  for  each  evaluated  location.  This 
kind of suitability map is what we call a simple scenario  

Chile is the country with high seismic activity and 6435 kms. of coast. These characteristics 
imply complex evacuation conditions under tsunamis. The population has 
been informed and trained so that in cases of large earthquakes in coastal areas they 
should  evacuate  the  seaside  and  seek  refuge  in  higher  grounds.  However,  in  some 
cities  in  the  north  of  the  country  a  tsunami  after  an  earthquake  may  occur  before 
people complete their evacuation. This is the case of Iquique (Fig. 1). 

In  order  to  make  an  effective  evacuation  plan,  various  experts  and  stakeholders 
must collaborate. Each one may have different opinions and hypotheses about which 
are  the  best  alternatives  to  elaborate  an  evacuation  plan.  In  order  to  exemplify  the 
proposed collaboration method we will assume there are five experts. Suppose two of  
 

116 

J. Frez et al. 

them  believe  the  best  evacuation  method  is  that  people  must  go  to  higher  grounds 
using any possible way and transport means. The remaining three experts have another 
hypothesis: most people cannot reach the higher grounds before the tsunami arrival, 
so they must seek refuge inside high buildings (vertical evacuation).  

In order to evaluate both options, organizations responsible for dealing with emergency 
situations typically relay only on traditional GIS. These systems provide information 
about the population living in the area, the number of schools, and other stored 
information.  

In case of a  tsunami, the evacuation problem can be classified as an ill-problem, 
because  there  is  no  real  information  about  the  number  of  people  who  must  be  evacuated,
 there is not real knowledge about the time available between the earthquake 
and the arriving of a tsunami to the coast. On top of this, the population in the area 
varies according to the day and time (an earthquake can occur at any time). 

 

Fig. 1. Left: Iquique from the sea, Right: Evacuation area 

 

We believe the time&belief  based scenarios can provide reasonably useful  information 
to decision making when there is uncertain incomplete information and complex 
modeling.  

Using Dempster-Shafer Theory,  we can build a set of hypotheses that can tell us 
where  people  can  be.  For  example,  there  is  an  area  at  the  Iquique  coastline  where 
there is a high belief that population  will be numerous during daytime, because this 
area  includes  a  high  concentration  of  universities,  restaurants,  shopping  centers,  a 
popular beach, etc. This area is also far from higher grounds (Fig 2). 

For this area, one solution is a vertical evacuation which means people should enter 
high  buildings.  This  scenario  can  be  described  as  an  evacuation  possibility,  i.e.,  if 
there  is  a  high  building  nearby  then  people  should  enter  it.    However,  an  obvious 
problem occurs if there are too many people and not enough high buildings.  

In order to cope with incomplete information and multiples scenarios, we propose 
to  use  a  Dempster-Shafer  based  Collaborative  Geographical  Information  System 
(CGIS). Using the CGIS, the above mentioned five experts can make their own hypotheses 
evaluation. However, as a result of this process they will have different suitability 
maps. For example, the first two experts can differ about where people can be at 
various  hours  of  the  day.  The  other  three  experts  can  also  differ  about  how  tall  the 
buildings must be or what kind of construction can resist a tsunami. 

  Cooperative Work for Spatial Decision Making: An Emergencies Management Case 

117 

Fig. 2. The coastline of Iquique. Left: Suitability map with population belief. Right: aerial view 
of the coastline. 

 

After each expert builds his/her own simple scenario they will have five different 
suitability  maps.  The  next  natural  step  will  group  the  suitability  maps  according  to 
both  evacuation  scenarios.  However  this  does  not  solve  the  collaboration  problem. 
Another case can be that each suitability map is based on similar hypotheses, e.g., that 
during daytime people are in: commercial areas, schools, universities, libraries, banks, 
bus stations, etc. However, one expert may believe there are many people at commercial 
areas, and another one may hypothesize these people are in residential areas. 

In order to solve the problem, we propose to combine the various suitability maps 
generated by each expert in a hierarchical order, by combining the various hypotheses 
according to certain operators, as it has been suggested in [4]. Of course, which suitability 
maps should be combined using which operation should be collaboratively decided 
by all experts. At each step the resulting suitability map should be the outcome 
of  the  discussion  of  each  scenario  possibility  including  the  experts’  hypotheses, 
known information about the area, and relevant factors that must be included. Suitability 
maps are combined as a result of argumentation and discussion. 

Next  section  describes  the  proposed  combination  methods.  Some  of  them  are  
designed  to  merge  data,  and  others  to  focus  on  important  factors  according  to  the 
experts’ considerations.  

3 

Combination Methods 

A complex scenario is the combination of various simple scenarios. Building a complex 
 scenario  requires  cooperative  work  among  various  stakeholders  like  experts  in 
the particular scenario area and decision makers. In order to provide useful tools for 
collaborative scenario building for a single area we must divide the work in two di-
mensions: Hypotheses Dimension and Time Dimension (see Fig 3). 
 
 

118 

J. Frez et al. 

ween 
tion 
bout 
and 
ider 

ased 
amThe 
hypotheses scenario
decision makers and expert
values at a certain time, for
the  number  of  people  at  c
night of a  working day.  W
the same time dimension fo
We propose to use five t
on combinations of suitabil
ple (Fig 4). Each initial scen
The Sum is probably the
consists  of  adding  the  bel
Graphically,  it  consists  of 
same  cell.  Visually  the  res
over the other because the f
be useful when three indep
police, transit and street ma
the governmental resources
decision maker can easily id
The Subtract operator s
evaluated  location.  This  op
one  scenario  and  other  one
possible refuge  sites.  Usin
places with low flood belief

o dimension is directly related to the collaboration betw
ts who may have different hypotheses about belief funct
r example one expert will have a certain hypothesis ab
commercial  areas  during  the  morning,  noon,  evening 
When combining suitability  maps, experts should consi
or stating their hypotheses.  
types of operators to collaboratively build a scenario ba
lity maps. We will use three initial scenarios for the exa
nario is the result of a specific set of hypotheses. 
e simplest operator a decision team should be able to use
e; it 
lief  value  of  each  scenario  for  each  evaluated  locati
ion. 
adding  the  values  of  the  three  bars  corresponding  to 
the 
one 
sulting  map  does  not  show  the  sum  of  the  three  bars 
can 
final values for each cell are normalized. This operator 
endent but related scenarios must be merged. For exam
mple 
aintenance human resources must be combined to evalu
uate 
s available during an extreme emergency. Using sum, 
the 
. 
dentify the resources available for each location (Fig 5).
each 
subtracts the belief value of two or more scenarios at e
ween 
perator  can  be  useful  to  evaluate  the  differences  betw
and 
es.  For  instance,  if  we  have  possible  flood  scenarios 
ng  subtract the decision  maker  can easily  identify ref
fuge 
f values (Fig 6). 

 
 

Fig. 3. Hypothesis Dimensi

ion and Time Dimension: At T1 experts have three hypotheses
s  

 

 

  Cooperative Work for Spatia

al Decision Making: An Emergencies Management Case 

119 

Fig. 4. Initial Scenarios 

 

The Average operator is
tion in each scenario. The r
numerically different. For e
experts’  maps  and  100  for
This operator can be used 
For example, places to depl
An OWA operator is th
der. The OWA operator ha
Shafer Theory [4]. Assumin
(values and weights are ord
two operators: OWA-ASC 

s the simple average between the belief values of each lo
result of this operator is visually similar to sum but can
example, if a cell has value 0 for the belief for two of 
r  another  one,  the  sum  will  be  100,  but  the  average  33
in  order to find places  where to deploy  scarce resourc
loy police forces according to criminality (Fig 7). 
he weighted average given an ascending or descending 
as been already used to combine data using the Demps
ng the values are ordered, only two results can be obtai
dered ascendingly or descendingly). Given this, we def
and OWA-DESC. 

ocan 
be 
the 
3.3. 
ces. 

or-
sterned 

fine 

 

S1+S2+S3

S1 - S2

AVG(S1;S2;S3)

 

Fig.  5.  Sum  of  the  three 
scenarios 

Fig. 6. Subtract of scenarios 

Fig. 7. Average of scenar

rios 

 

When  using  the  OWA-D
descending order. This com
scenario, avoiding that a ce
ignored  because  of  simple
large belief degree at a cert
with low degree values from
When using the OWA-A
and the weights are also or
sizes the belief when the v
similar to average, but it is 
allocate specific and limited
be used to identify critical a

DESC  operator,  values  and  weights  are  ordered  both 
mbination can emphasize the largest belief  values of e
ertain important fact known by one of the experts could
e  averaging.  For  example,  if  a  criminality  scenario  ha
tain location, using average this information can be mi
m other scenarios (Fig 8). 
ASC operator, values are ordered in a ascending seque
dered in an ascending sequence. This combination emp
values are constantly high in all scenarios. This operato
not susceptible to isolated big values. It can be applied
d resources that can support multiple scenarios. It can a
areas. 

  in 
each 
d be 
as  a 
xed 

ence 
phaor 
is 
d to 
also 

 

120 

J. Frez et al. 

Fig.

. 8. OWA-DESC applied to 3 scenarios 

 

4 

Discussion 

The  proposed  approach  fo
may  be  used  to  collaborat
tools. This platform could b
volcano eruptions, air or w
that could be modeled using
The main drawbacks of 
Shafer  Theory.  Currently, 
values, not magnitude valu
ber of people is not possible
applying an operator betwe
belief values and the origin
bination could still be usefu

or  cooperative  work  in  spatial  decision  making  scenar
tively  analyze  spatial  information  using  decision  mak
be used in several disaster scenarios. For example: floo
ater pollution, tsunami, and in general any kind of disa
g GIS technologies. 
the proposed technology are strongly related to Demps
a  suitability  map  is  the  graphical  representation  of  be
es. The relevance of this issue is that computing the nu
e given a belief value or suitability map. Furthermore, a
een two or more suitability maps, the relation between 
nal hypotheses set is not clear. However, the resulting co
ul as a visualization and decision making tool. 

rios 
king 
ods, 
aster 

sterelief 

umafter 

the 
omReferences 


[1]  Chen,  R.,  Sharman,  R.,  R
management. Communica
[2]  Frez, J., Baloian, N., Zur
chanisms into Geographic
and Inf. Technologies (CS
[3]  Ghayoumian,  J.,  Gherme
DSS for identification of 
Isfahan, Iran. Environmen
[4]  Merigó, J.M., Casanovas,
Dempster–Shafer  belief 
(2009) 

onse 

Rao,  R.,  Upadhyaya,  S.J.:  Coordination  in  emergency  respo
ations of the ACM 51(5), 66–73 (2008) 
Merita,
 G.: Getting Serious about Integrating Decision Support M
c Information Systems. In: Proc. 9th Int. Conf. on Computer
r Sc. 
) 
SIT), pp. 1–11. IEEE Computer Society Press, Yerevan (2013)
ezcheshme,  B.,  Feiznia,  S.,  Noroozi,  A.A.:  Integrating  GIS 
and 
f suitable areas for artificial recharge, case study Meimeh Ba
asin, 
ntal Geology 47(4), 493–500 (2005) 
, M.: Induced aggregation operators in decision making with
structure.  International  J.  of  Intelligent  Systems 24,  934–

h the 
–954 

[5]  Shafer, G.: A mathematic

cal theory of evidence, vol. 1. Princeton University Press, Prin

nceton 
(1976) 

 
 

