Bridging the Gap Between Decisions  

and Their Implementations 

Marcos R.S. Borges1, José A. Pino2, and Renata M. Araujo1,3 

1 Post-Graduate Program in Informatics, NCE&IM, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro 

PO Box 2324, CEP 20001-970, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 

{mborges,renata}@nce.ufrj.br 

2 Department of Computer Science, Universidad de Chile 

PO Box 2777, Santiago, Chile 
jpino@dcc.uchile.cl 

3 School of Applied Informatics, Universidade Federal do Estado do Rio de Janeiro 

Av. Pasteur, 458, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 
renata.araujo@uniriotec.br 

Abstract. Decisions are frequently sent to implementers without much detail. It 
should not be a surprise, then, that results are not as expected. The lack of accompanying 
 information  and  a  common  context  produces  wrongly  implemented 
or lost decisions. This paper proposes a solution to this problem based 
on computer technology. In particular, a combination of tools including shared 
workspaces,  process  modeling  with  workflow  and  a  discussion  tool,  is  proposed.
 A case is used to illustrate the problem and its solution. 

1   Introduction 

There has been much emphasis on improving the decision making process but little 
attention  has  been  paid  to  the  implementation  phase  following  a  decision.  The  gap 
between the end of a decision making process and its implementation activities may, 
in fact, turn the decision inconsequent, due to lack of interaction and negotiation between 
decision makers and those who will implement the decision. Often, decisions 
that are implemented without the necessary clarification and negotiation may generate 
outcomes, which are different from those planned at the time of the decision.  

This paper addresses the gap that exists between decision makers and implementers 
around the complete understanding of a decision context and the form of implementation.
  It  discusses  why  linking  decision  implementation  activities  to  the  corresponding 
decision meeting is essential to make the meeting cycle fully successful. We 
claim supporting such link with a computer system is both efficient and effective. 

Meetings  rarely  die.  That  is  how  Oppenheim  [1]  summarizes  the  cycle  in  which 
decision meetings occur: preparation of a meeting (pre-meeting), meeting itself and 
implementation (post-meeting). The post-meeting results and follow-up in turn may 
motivate the preparation of the next meeting, thus closing the cycle [2]. 

The complete meeting cycle can be computer supported. Pre-meetings can be advantageously 
 supported  to  encourage  careful  pondering  of  arguments  in  favor  or 
against  decision  options  before  the  meeting  [3].  Brainstorming,  voting  and  other 
meeting activities can be supported both in distributed or face-to-face situations [4, 5]. 
Follow-up activities can be tracked with a workflow system [6]. 

G.-J. de Vreede et al. (Eds.): CRIWG 2004, LNCS 3198, pp. 153–165, 2004. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004 

154      Marcos R.S. Borges, José A. Pino, and Renata M. Araujo 

Although the need for relating decision meetings and the activities following them 
may seem obvious, cultural barriers and lack of appropriate tools induce just informal 
and very incomplete links. As a result, important decisions are not properly or timely 
implemented. It appears, then, that all efforts to make good decisions with Information 
 Systems  and/or  Operations  Research  models  and  techniques  are  threatened  by 
deficient  implementation.  Therefore,  there  is  a  missing  link  between  decisions  and 
their implementations, which needs to be well understood and supported.  

We identify three problems in the connection between decision and its implementation.
 The first and possibly the most visible problem is when decision makers detect 
implemented results differ from what they expected. A second problem is the typical 
insufficient information attached to the decision. The third problem concerns the different 
contexts decision makers and implementers have. Each of these three problems 
is studied below.  

The  approach  we  chose  for  the proposed solution is the use of a combination of 
tools. These tools are: a shared workspace, a discussion supporting tool and a processmodeling 
tool. The later will be used to represent the decision as viewed by the implementation 
 team.  The  implementation  process  will  enable  decision  makers  and 
implementers  to  discuss  over  a  common  basis.  The  discussion  supporting  tool  will 
enable the clarification of issues which may arise during the implementation process. 
The  shared  workspace  will  enable  both  teams  to  bring  their  specific  contexts  to  a 
common understanding. 

The paper is composed of six sections. Section 2 presents a case, which will help 
us to understand the problem and to illustrate the proposed solution. Section 3 analyzes 
the requirements for the link between the decision meeting and its corresponding 
 implementation  for  the  case.  Next  we  present  the  functionality  of  the  proposed 
solution and how the solution can be implemented. Section 5 has a general discussion 
on the suitability of the approach. Section 6 concludes the paper. 

2   The Problem 

The Trucco Company needs to install a Call Center to support one of its marketing 
campaigns to be launched next month. The project requires 10-12 work desks and the 
Project  Manager  decides  to  request  14  workstations  to  support  the  operation.  She 
justifies  the  two  additional  pieces  of  equipment  as  back-ups  in  case  of  failure.  She 
sends the request to the company Board. The request includes the equipment specification,
 an estimate of the cost and a justification for the number of workstations. She 
also informs the Board the Call Center operation will start operation within 35 days 
from that date. 

The Board discusses the request on its weekly meeting. It decides to approve the 
request and establishes the amount of US$14.000 (the estimated amount) as the project 
budget, after a brief discussion on the need for the two additional workstations 
and the cost estimate. The decision is passed to the Purchasing Department together 
with the original documentation prepared by the Project Manager. 

The Purchasing Department sends a RFP to its traditional suppliers. In view of the 
project  deadline,  a  Purchase  Officer  defines  that  the  equipment  must  be  delivered 
within  15  days.  The  RFP  contains  the  specification,  deliverable  conditions  and  the 
cut-off date, i.e., when the company expects to receive the proposals. Two of the three 

