Collaborative Authoring, Use, and Reuse of Learning

Material in a Computer-Integrated Classroom

Nelson Baloian, José A. Pino, and Olivier Motelet

Universidad de Chile, Departamento de Ciencias de la Computacion

Blanco Encalada 2120, Santiago, Chile

{nbaloian,jpino,omotelet}@dcc.uchile.cl

Abstract. Reuse of computer based learning material is a key requirement for
any  practical  approach  to  support  adaptive  and  dynamic  teaching/learning  inside 
 and  outside  the  classroom.  Unlike  hardware  technology  innovations,  the
software support for reuse inside the classroom is still not satisfactory. We present 
an approach to reuse material based in the Computer-integrated Classroom
(CiC) environment and a special type of active documents used for containing
learning material defined by the user to fit the particular needs of a lecture. This
approach allows collaboration at two levels. The first one involves learning unit
authors, who can jointly develop a course and teach it independently. The second 
level of collaboration refers to teacher and students exchanging and sharing
documents. This framework does not impose a certain teaching/learning style. It
rather supports the seamless transition from one teaching/learning mode to another 
one, using the same material.

1   Introduction

There has been much work done to support the creation and management of multime-
dia-based learning material and courses for e-learning (see [10] for a sampling). However,
 most  of it is intended  to  be  used  only  in  a  distance-learning  scenario.  Despite
this,  many  current  teaching/learning  activities  still  take  place  inside  the  classroom.
Also, the new tendencies are to redefine the role of the teacher as someone who catalyzes 
 and  moderates  collaborative  learning  activities  or  someone  who  manages  distributed 
 activities  and  a  variety  of  (learning)  resources.  We  conceive  a  face-to-face
lecture  supported  by  computer  technology  as  a  succession  of  various  teaching  and
learning activities like presentations by the teacher, individual or collaborative problem 
solving, discussion, etc., where computers and computer-based learning material
play  a  key  role  enriching  and  supporting  these  activities  [9].  Computer  technology
should support each activity with the proper tool and learning material. However, the
costs of producing good quality computer-based learning material are frequently high
and their range of use limited. For these reasons, many authors have pointed out the
convenience of reusing already existing learning material for other teaching/learning
contexts. The works of  [14,4] and initiatives like LOM [18] are directed to achieve
this goal.

In this work we present a framework for supporting teachers in  the  collaborative
authoring of a learning unit. On a second phase, it supports the flexible and collaboJ.
 Favela and D. Decouchant  (Eds.): CRIWG 2003,  LNCS 2806, pp. 199–207, 2003.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

200         N. Baloian, J.A. Pino, and O. Motelet

rative use of this material in a Computer-integrated Classroom, considering the different 
 backgrounds  the  students  may  have,  preferred  teaching/learning  style  of  teacher
and students. By creating a learning unit we mean here selecting and sequencing some
learning  materials  for  a  defined  learning  goal  in  such  a  way  it  can  be  adapted  to  a
particular  case  of  teaching/learning  situation  [8].  The  structure  of  the  learning  unit
syllabus plays a key role for achieving this goal [11].

The final users of this system are the teachers. It is designed to facilitate the management 
 of  the  learning  material  (retrieval,  distribution,  share,  and  collection)  supporting 
the seamless transition from one learning activity type to another. For example,
  the  teacher  may  present  a  document  previously  stored  in  the  repository  of  the
lecture or create it on an electronic blackboard. Then, she can distribute it to the students 
and ask them to modify or complete it in an individual or group working session.
  Then,  she  can  collect  the  results  and  present  them  on  the  e-board.  Another
teacher may prefer to collaboratively solve the problem with the whole class by sharing 
the same document. This framework allows to maintain the dynamics of the lecture 
by supporting all these actions with a minimum of required steps.

In a first part this article relates the framework to the existing approaches. Then it
describes the tools that implement our ideas in the context of the CiC. Finally, it discusses 
 their  collaboration  and  reuse  properties  through  the  particular  example  of  a
current Java programming course at our university.

2   Related Work

Numerous electronic supports for the teacher’s task are studied in the field of distance
e-learning. However our work goes out of the scope of distance learning since it deals
with the face-to-face classroom situation. In this context the requirements are different 
and involve some visualization and usage issues.

Making a lesson for both distant and face-to-face electronic learning environments
involves  management,  distribution,  and  collection  of  didactic  activities.  Syberwork
[15],  LearnITy  [16]  or  WebCT  [17]  provide  administration  support  for  those  tasks.
Moreover,  those  tools  enable  the  cooperative  building  of  the  lesson  with  asynchronous 
or synchronous facilities. LearnITy offers indeed the possibility of  predefining
some  strategies  that  could  distinguish  the  author’s  personality  or  adapt  to  different
student levels or learning habits.

In a face-to-face context, we pretend to enable dynamic adaptation of the lessons
structure depending on direct feedback from the  students.  In  a  distant  learning  context,
 building lessons structure and strategies is done before the actual learning period.
Then, the student himself chooses the structure he thinks is best suited to his level. He
could sometimes be assisted in his choice by an expert system computing the results
of tests he previously fulfilled. By contrast, in an interactive lesson, the teacher should
do  this  choice  herself  based  on  the  analysis  of  the  reactions  and  feedback  from  the
students. The existing face-to-face learning environments like Hypercourseware [12],
and E-Class [1] focus on supporting the teacher through distribution and collection of
activities, on monitoring the lesson status or capturing the teacher live-contribution on
the activities. Nevertheless, they do not aim to let the teacher dynamically adapt the
lesson to the audience.

