Mobile Support for Collaborative Work 

Luis A. Guerrero1, José A. Pino1, César A. Collazos2, 

Andres Inostroza1, and Sergio F. Ochoa1 

1 Department of Computer Science 

Universidad de Chile 

Blanco Encalada 2120, Santiago, Chile 

{luguerre,jpino,neinostr,sochoa}@dcc.uchile.cl 

2 Department of Systems 
Universidad del Cauca 

FIET-Sector Tulcan, Popayán, Colombia 
{ccollazo}@unicauca.edu.co 

Abstract. An attempt is made to characterize situations in which the use of mobile 
devices can be useful for the development of collaborative systems. Mobile 
devices  have  advantages,  such  as  small  size,  low  cost,  portability.  They  also 
have disadvantages, such as small viewing screen, little storage capacity, slow 
processor,  unreliable  communication  facilities.  The  idea  is  to  use  them  when 
advantages are most relevant and disadvantages do not affect the system under 
development.  A  collaborative  system  for  text  co-authoring  is  presented  as  an 
example of design for the best conditions of mobile devices inclusion. This system 
 uses  the  mobile  devices  for  individual  tasks  performed  while  away  from 
normal work site in uncomfortable or congested places.  

1   Introduction 

Many people need to move themselves to accomplish their jobs. For them, hand-held 
computer devices have convenient small size and there are simple but useful applications 
already running on these gadgets, such as telephone directories, to-do lists, and 
calendars. 

Hand-helds have recently improved the portability introduced by notebooks some 
years  earlier.  The  newest  models  include  relatively  larger  memories  than  the  first 
ones, better graphic resolution and wireless communication. Therefore, many system 
developers  increasingly  look  at  hand-helds  as  tentative  devices  to  build  with  them 
new  applications  which  might  take  advantage  of  their  features.  In  particular,  some 
developers may be interested on designing systems to support people doing cooperative 
tasks. However, a few relevant questions should be asked: are hand-helds appropriate 
components of collaborative applications? If they are, which are the tasks they 
support in the best way? 

Of course, it is not obvious hand-helds – also called Personal Data Assistants, or 
PDAs – may be adequate for ambitious systems involving several people with many 
complex  interactions  among  them.  One  of  the  main  advantages  of  handheld  computers 
 is  that  they  are  portable.  Also,  initial  vendor-supplied  software  encouraged 
individual rather than collaborative use. Even now, most handheld applications often 
reinforce the idea of a handheld computer as a  personal digital assistant. NevertheG.
-J. de Vreede et al. (Eds.): CRIWG 2004, LNCS 3198, pp. 363–375, 2004. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004 

364      Luis A. Guerrero et al. 

less, recent articles describe group or collaborative applications based on this kind of 
devices [20, 26]. 

Developing collaborative applications including traditional computers is already a 
hard task [13]. Trying to design useful collaborative applications using PDAs present 
further challenges, since these devices have several difficulties for group work when 
compared to normal computers. These restrictions include small screens for visualization 
and interaction, limited input facilities, short-life batteries and slow processors. 

On the other hand, when we observe collaborative work we may notice there are 
some  tasks  or  activities  which  are  performed  individually  in  many  cases.  We  may 
hypothesize PDAs as potentially useful devices for these individual tasks within the 
group  context.  This  hypothesis  may  be  reinforced  if  these  tasks  are  to  be  done  by 
people with high mobility.  

The purpose of this paper is to attempt to characterize collaborative situations in 
which PDAs could be used with advantage. It will also present a case in which such 
conditions are held for one of the most traditional collaborative applications: text coauthoring.
 

2   Cases Reported in the Literature 

The  mobile  computing  concept  is  quite  new  and  has  no  clear  definition,  although 
some studies have already tried to survey this fast-growing area of information technology.
  Mobile  computing  does  not  only  involve  mobile  computing  devices  (notebooks,
  cellular  phones,  PDAs  and  wearable  computers),  which  are  designed  to  be 
carried around, but also the mobile networks to which these computers are connected. 
Mobile services are the third component, rounding out this definition of mobile computing.
 

In  this  sense,  mobile  computing  has  been  discussed  in  just  a  few  recent  papers 
from certain typical points of view. Wireless network service problems in so-called 
wireless  personal  area  networks  (PAN)  are  a  fundamental  issue  [38].  In  his  paper, 
Zimmerman  examines  wireless  technologies  appropriate  for  PANs,  and  reviews 
promising research in resource discovery and service utilization, including data formats.
  Zimmerman  already  emphasizes  the  role  of  Extensible  Markup  Language 
(XML)  as  a  standard  for  structured  document  interchange.  Some  interesting  further 
problems of mobile network services are discussed by Chalmers [4]. 

We agree with Zimmerman in emphasizing the evolution of PDAs as the engine 
driving  mobile  computing.  Pocket-size,  low-price  units  with  long-lasting  power 
autonomy and broad functionality guarantee the critical mass of buyers necessary to 
motivate the industry to produce and further develop this type of devices. (The growth 
of mobile phone use is a good example of such a stimulant loop). Zimmerman’s list 
begins with the legendary but rather clumsy Newton, introduced by Apple Computer 
in 1993. The Nokia 9001 communicator, introduced in 1998, was another milestone, 
representing the first successful fusion of a handheld PC with a mobile phone. Unfortunately,
 it ran on a non-standard operating system, and it was therefore short of software.
  The  Sagem  Pocket  PC,  introduced  by  Sagem  and  Microsoft  in  2000,  was  a 
hybrid of the same kind, but with a standard operating system: Windows CE.  

The opposite of integrating functions in a single device is device modularization, 
which has some additional positive effects. A small mobile phone with data transmission 
capability can be connected to a PDA or another more specialized device, thus 

