Improving the Use of Strategies in Computer-Supported

Collaborative Processes

César A. Collazos*, Luis A. Guerrero, José A. Pino, and Sergio F. Ochoa

Department of Computer Science

Universidad de Chile

Blanco Encalada 2120, Santiago, Chile

{ccollazo,luguerre,jpino,sochoa}@dcc.uchile.cl

Abstract. The members of a work group need to apply a common strategy to
collaboratively  solve  a  problem.  A  good  strategy  will  mainly  depend  on  the
collaboration scenario, participants’ background, and available tools. This paper
presents two widgets that have been useful to help to define and use good group
members’  strategies  in  collaborative  learning  scenarios.  The  concepts  behind
these widgets can be reused to support strategy definition processes in order to
improve  the  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  computer-supported  collaborative
processes

1   Introduction

Computers  have  become  very  important  to  support  group  work  and  collaboration.
People interact with other people in all aspects of life and, as computers have become
prevalent, users seek computer support to extend their interactions. Besides, advances
in  networking  technology  and  software  systems  will  lead  to  an  emphasis  on  interpersonal 
computing. Understanding group dynamics and the collaborative process of
work  groups  are  then  both  interesting  research  fields  and  the  basis  for  new  tools  to
support the findings.

In this scenario, the computer supported collaborative learning process has received
much care [15]. In this process, the results  of learning activities  depend not  only  on
the  student’s  skills  to  execute  a  task,  but  also  on  the  strategy  of  collaboration  with
teammates to do it. The use, understanding and adoption of a strategy are crucial for
an effective and efficient collaborative learning.

In  a  series  of  preliminary  experiments  in  Computer-Supported  Collaborative
Learning  (CSCL)  environments,  it  has  been  observed  that  groups  with  little  experience 
in collaborative work, understand, use and adopt cooperation strategies in a bad
manner  [8].  In  these  experiments,  although  all  groups  were  deficient  in  the  strategy
definition, those that tried to define and communicate a strategy got better results in
CSCL activities. Based on this preliminary information, our work explores whether

                                                
* On leave from FIET, Universidad del Cauca, Colombia.

J. Favela and D. Decouchant  (Eds.): CRIWG 2003,  LNCS 2806, pp. 247–260, 2003.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

248        C.A. Collazos et al.

the impact of a consistent use of a strategy can produce good results during this kind
of activities. Our hypothesis claims a good use, definition and adoption of strategies
should imply good collaboration, which in turn it is known to lead to good learning.
This hypothesis is emphasized in the case of groups just formed or with little collaborative 
experience.

We  have  designed  a  widget  to  support  discussions  within  the  learning  group  and
another  one  to  support  monitoring  the  tasks  done  by  the  group.  These  widgets  are
intended to improve the strategic aspect of group work and thus, they provide a way to
validate  the  hypothesis.  Both  widgets  were  embedded  in  a  tool  called  TeamQuest,
which  is  a  labyrinth  type  collaborative  game.  Two  versions  of  this  tool  were  used
during the experiments, one with widgets and another one without them. The performance 
of the learning activities was measured by using the indicators proposed by Collazos 
 et  al.  [8].  The  participants  in  the  experimental  activities  were  primary  school
students.

Next section presents related work about methods to promote the use of strategies
in CSCL activities and the justification of our proposal. Section 3 describes the preliminary 
study that originates this proposal and the results obtained from such study.
Section 4 presents the TeamQuest tool and the widgets developed to improve the use
of strategies. Section 5 describes the experiments carried out in order to measure the
impact of consistent strategy use over a CSCL activity, and the  obtained results. Finally,
 Section 6 presents the conclusions and future work.

2   Background

Since the advent of computer supported collaborative work, CSCL research has been
of major interest. It has been conclusively argued that a focus on the process of collaboration 
is necessary in order to understand the value of working together with peers
for  learning  [20].  CSCL  is  a  research  area  that  reports  a  great  amount  of  scientific
work  in  several  aspects.  Unfortunately,  there  are  no  studies  focused  on  how  to  improve 
the use of strategies in collaborative activities using computer technology. Collaborative 
learning technologies must go beyond generic groupware applications, and
even the basic technology is not yet well developed [24]. Therefore, it is necessary to
define a model describing how to design socio-technical environments that will promote 
collaboration within groups.

From the collaborative work viewpoint, effective groups have goals being clarified
and modified as follows. There should be the best possible match between individual
and group goals. They are also cooperatively structured so all members are committed
to  reach  them.  Results  of  experimentation  have  shown  groups  were  ineffective  because 
 communication  was  poor.  This  could  be  explained  by  lack  of  strategy  understanding 
shown by some members of the group. Thus, it is not only important to understand 
the problem, as Dillenbourg mentions [12], but to  be aware that the rest of
the people can understand the problem situation during a collaborative activity.

Soller et al. [23] claim the way in which a student shares new knowledge with the
group and the way in which  the  group  responds  are  important.  They  determine  to  a
large extent how well this new knowledge is assimilated into the group, and whether
or not the group members learn the new concept. Also, as Clarck & Schaefer [3] men-

