Groupware Support for Cooperative Process Elicitation

Rosa M. de Freitas1, Marcos R.S. Borges1, Flávia Maria Santoro1, and José A. Pino2

1 Departamento de Ciências da Computação and NCE

Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro

Caixa Postal 2324, CEP:20001-970, Rio de Janeiro, Brasil

rmf@triang.com.br, {mborges,flaviams}@nce.ufrj.br

2 Computer Science Department

Universidad de Chile

Casilla 2777, Santiago, Chile

jpino@dcc.chile.cl

Abstract.  We  propose  an  alternative  approach  to  the  usual  business  process
improvement, in which company workers play an active role in re-designing the
organization's processes in a cooperative style. We present the CEPE tool - Cooperative 
Editor for Processes Elicitation - which is a cooperative graphic editor
that  supports  the  building  of  the  knowledge  about  the  current  process  and  reports 
 associated  problems.  Moreover,  this  paper  presents  the  results  of  a  case
study in which the editor was used.

1   Introduction

Currently,  management  spends  too  much  time  correcting  problems  that  should  not
have occurred in the first place, if business processes were correct. According to Harrington 
[1], emphasis should now  be placed on  preventing  problems.  Improvements
can take many forms. Barriers must be removed which interrupt the flow of work and
processes  must  be  streamline  to  reduce  waste.  The  way  to  improvement  is  through
business process improvement (BPI).

Business  Process  Improvement  involves  implementing  major  changes  in  the  way
organizations are managed. BPI’s major objectives are to make processes effective to
achieve  desired  results;  to  make  processes  efficient  to  minimize  resources;  and  to
make processes adaptable to meet both customer and business changing needs. Business 
processes used today by most companies have not kept pace with today’s business 
environment. Management must focus on and invest resources to revise critical
business processes to make them more efficient, effective, and in tune with the needs
of individuals, customers and the organization [1].

The use of the BPI strategy has lead to reengineering within organizations. “Companies 
 that  undertake  reengineering  not  only  compress  processes  horizontally  by
having case workers or case teams perform multiple, sequential tasks but vertically
as well.” [2]. As already confirmed by several studies [3][4][5], reengineering is not
only a one-time event, during which all processes have been optimized, but requires
a permanent care of the processes, adapting them to the demands of the organization.


J. Favela and D. Decouchant  (Eds.): CRIWG 2003,  LNCS 2806, pp. 232–246, 2003.
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003

Groupware Support for Cooperative Process Elicitation         233

Process improvement projects are usually provided by outside consultants. The advantage 
 of doing so this is that they are not involved with the  current  model  of  the
organization. However, external consulting also carries drawbacks in this area. One is
the high cost of the service [6][7]. Other disadvantages are related to the reengineering 
results, which may alienate employees or be too ambitious for the current culture
of the organization.

On the other hand, reengineering may also be considered a challenging and permanent 
 cooperative  task.  In  order  to  achieve  better  results,  it  should  involve  as  many
agents as possible. They can contribute to the understanding of current practices and
to their improvement.

The first task of such process improvement project is to elicitate the current process 
and to identify its problems. Considering that each individual has particular forms
of working, perceiving and describing the reality based on his/her own values, beliefs
and  truths,  we  could  not  affirm  that  simply  stating  ideas  and  visions  together  will
represent this reality. It is necessary to represent the several and different views about
the  work  inside  an  organization.  This  task  has  a  strong  aggregative  characteristic,
stimulating  effective  participation  of  workers  in  order  to  achieve  a  vision  that  describes 
the details of each process that maps the organization’s life.

This  paper  describes  a  computer-based  tool,  which  aims  at  helping  the  workers
with the joint effort of consultants in the unambiguous cooperative elicitation of the
current process, the identification of potential problems and the development of eventual
solutions. The main goal is to provide support to the description of processes, establishing
a common language among participants, independent of time and space.

The CEPE tool, which stands for Cooperative Editor for Process Elicitation, can be
used after workers are trained in the process improvement activities and for those who
are ready to adopt a  positive attitude towards the process improvement project. The
focus  of  the  proposed  approach  is  on  a  participatory  basis  design.  The  CEPE  tool
exploits the cooperative nature of such a task and at the same time generates a  predefinition 
of current processes, which will be the basis for the formal definition of the
organization ‘To-Be process’.

This article is divided into 4 parts. In Section 2, we discuss the issues related to cooperative 
process design. Section 3 presents the CEPE groupware. A case study developed
with the use of CEPE is described in Section 4. Section 5 concludes the paper.

2   Cooperative Process Design

The  administration  and  improvement  of  processes  allow  companies  or  industries  to
develop  faster  and  help  key-area  processes  to  be  more  efficient.  There  are  several
opportunities  "to  start  again"  with  the  processes  re-engineering.  For  example,  it  is
advisable to reformulate a process that is aimed at outsourcing before giving it to an
outside  company.  Another  example,  an  inadequate  information  technology  infrastructure,
 which constitutes an opportunity for processes improvement; several companies 
 need  to  reconstruct  important  systems,  but  they  should  not  simply  automate
inadequate or incompatible processes. It is probably more preferable that these companies 
combine the radical innovation with the continuous improvement [8].

The details of a specific method or approach to the process improvement can vary,
but some activities are fundamental for the success of any initiative: the selection of

