Journal of Universal Computer Science, vol. 13, no. 7 (2007), 1022-1032
submitted: 7/3/07, accepted: 25/7/07, appeared: 28/7/07 © J.UCS

Designing Collaborative Learning Environments Using 

Digital Games 

(Department of Computer Science (DCC), Universidad de Chile, Chile 

(Department of Computer Science (DCC), Universidad de Chile, Chile 

(Department of Computer Science (DCC), Universidad de Chile, Chile 

César A. Collazos 

(FIET, Universidad del Cauca, Colombia 

ccollazo@unicauca.edu.co) 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

Luis A. Guerrero 

luguerre@dcc.uchile.cl) 

José A. Pino 

jpino@dcc.uchile.cl) 

Sergio F. Ochoa 

sochoa@dcc.uchile.cl) 

Gerry Stahl 

(Drexel University, USA 
gerry.stahl@drexel.edu) 

Abstract:  Collaborative  learning  environments  require  carefully  crafted  designs  –both 
technical  and  social.  This  paper  presents  a  model  describing  how  to  design  socio-technical 
environments that will promote collaboration in group activities. A game was developed based 
on  this  model.  This  tool  was  used  to  conduct  experiments  for  studying  the  collaborative 
learning process. Testing with this system revealed some strengths and weaknesses, which are 
being addressed in the on-going research. 

Keywords: Collaborative Learning, CSCL, Model Design, Collaborative Games 
Categories: K.3, K.3.1, K.3.2 

1 

Introduction  

Quantitative  research  in  CSCL  is  hard  to  conduct  because  quantitative  measures  of 
collaborative  interactions  tend  to  lose  the  collaborative  content  [Stahl  2002].  There 
are many reasons that difficult the measuring of the collaboration process [Collazos et 
al. 2006]. However, advantages of collaborative learning are clear and they are well 
documented  [Johnson  et  al.  1986,  Slavin  1988].  The  design  and  measurement  of 
collaborative  activities  continue  playing  a  key  role  on  both:  (a)  the  learning  results 
that can be obtained and (b) the improvement capability of such activity.  Currently 
there are several proposals to design or  measure collaborative processes in learning 
environments;  however,  there  are  just  few  ones  able  to  integrate  these  two  key 

Collazos C.A., Guerrero L.A., Pino J.A., Ochoa S.F., Stahl G.: Designing ...

1023

elements. Unfortunately, these integrated proposals are complex to apply; therefore it 
is not clear they can be used by most of teachers and instructors.  

In  order  to  deal  with  these  challenges  this  paper  presents  a  model  to  guide  the 
design of socio-technical environments to promote collaboration in group activities. A 
collaborative learning environment was designed using the model, and it was applied 
in a real scenario. The model allowed us to determine the interactions among subjects, 
the initial conditions and the design of the shared workspace structure.  

The  proposal  also  includes  a  set  of  indicators  that  have  shown  to  be  useful  to 
measure  collaboration  in  learning  environments  [Collazos  et  al.  2003a].  These 
indicators complement the design model, allowing teachers and instructors to measure 
and  analyze  the  students’  performance.  Thus,  it  is  possible  to  design  effective 
collaborative learning environments (CLE). 

Next  section  presents  the  related  work.  Section  3  describes  the  model  for 
designing  environments  that  promote  collaboration.  Section  4  introduces  the 
collaborative  indicators  to  be  used  to  measure  and  analyze  collaborative  learning 
activities. Section 5 presents the CLE designed using the model. Section 6 shows and 
explains  the  experimental  results  obtained  using  the  CLE.  Section  7  presents  the 
conclusions and further work. 

2  Related Work 

There  is  no  doubt  collaborative  games  could  be  useful  for  learning.  The  most 
important  issue  is  to  investigate  the  requirements  that  game-based  learning  should 
satisfy  to  get  the  best  results.  Thus,  [Di  Blas  et  al.  2005]  report  an  experience  in 
which,  of  course,  educational,  relational,  and  organizational  settings  are  at  least  as 
much  important  as  technology  on  the  success  or  failure  of  a  collaborative  learning 
experiment. They also found the teacher’s participation and motivation was crucial. 
Focusing on the cognitive capabilities and needs of the learner has produced several 
innovative  computer-mediated  micro-worlds  aimed  at  helping  students  learn  a 
specific domain [Anderson 1993]. Activity Theory (AT) [Wertsch 1979] can also be a 
source of inspiration for designing collaborative learning environments [Gifford et al. 
1999]: AT claims that internal activities emerge out of practical external activity and 
thus  the  unit  of  analysis  must  include  the  person  and  the  culturally  defined 
environment. 

Instead of designing systems that compensate for meta-cognitive deficiencies by 
becoming increasingly directive, we should develop systems supporting the learner’s 
meta-cognitive  activities  (or  even  better,  that  develop  their  meta-cognitive  skills) 
[Dillenbourg 1992]. As Dillenbourg mentions, in collaborative learning environments 
particular forms of interactions are needed to trigger the desired learning mechanisms 
[Dillenbourg  1999].  There  is,  however,  no  guarantee  that  those  interactions  occur. 
Hence, the idea is to develop mechanisms for increasing the probability that they will 
happen.  One  of  these  ways  is  by  designing  well-specified  collaborative  scenarios 
[Santoro  et  al.  2005].  Thus,  we  need  to  design  the  learning  task  and  the  learning 
environment.  The  design  of  the  learning  task  needs  to  draw  on  the  best  we  know 
about how people learn, on knowledge of academic subject matter and/or vocational 
competencies, and on knowledge of the learners. A task needs to be sufficiently wellspecified 
 that  the  chances  of  a  learner  engaging  in  unproductive  activity  are  kept 

1024

Collazos C.A., Guerrero L.A., Pino J.A., Ochoa S.F., Stahl G.: Designing ...

within  tolerable  limits.  The  learning  environment  is  the  physical  environment  or 
physical settings within which learners work. 

3  The Proposed Model 

The proposed model involves three interrelated activities, each one provides feedback 
that  allow  designers  to  establish  the  best  design  of  the  collaborative  learning 
environment  [Figure  1].  The  model  attempts  to  assist  collaboration  in  two  ways: 
establishing  the  situation  in  which  the  collaboration  takes  place  (set  up  initial 
conditions), and structuring the collaboration itself through coaching or self regulation 
(maintaining the collaboration).  

 

Figure 1: Proposed model for supporting collaboration 

 

The cycle starts with the definition of the initial set of conditions that probably 
will  be  present  during  the  collaboration  process.  Such  a  definition  influences  the 
elements that will be used in the process and the role of each one of them. These two 
elements  put  restrictions  on  the  strategies  that  can  be  used  for  maintaining  the 
collaboration among the participants. The strategies to maintain the collaboration will 
make a difference between a successful or unsuccessful activity 

As a result of applying this model it is expected the collaborative activity carried 
out on the learning environment promotes collaboration among group members. Next 
section describes these three key elements. 

Establishing Initial Conditions 

3.1 
A  first  way  to  increase  the  probability  that  some  types  of  interactions  occur  is  to 
carefully  design  the  situation  where  the  collaboration  will  take  place.  Numerous 
independent  variables  have been studied in order to determine the conditions under 
which  collaborative  learning  is  efficient  and  effective.  Based  on  Bannon’s  work 
[Bannon  1989],  the  proposed  model  defines  a  set  of  elements  to  consider  for 
specifying  the  initial  characteristics  of  the  groups.  Next,  these  elements  are  briefly 
explained. 

Collazos C.A., Guerrero L.A., Pino J.A., Ochoa S.F., Stahl G.: Designing ...

1025

•  Type  of  activity.  Specify  the  type  of  activity  that  will  be  performed  by  the 
members  of  the  group  in  order  to  solve  a  problematic  situation.  It  could,  e.g., 
include tasks such as: puzzle solving, editing a newspaper, writing a letter, etc. 

•  Nature  of  collaborators.  Specify  the  types  of  interaction  that  occur.  It  could 
include  three  types  of  interactions:  peer-to-peer  interaction,  teacher-student 
interaction, and student-computer interaction. 

•  Group heterogeneity. This covers several independent variables such as: size of 
the  group,  gender  and  differences  within  the  group.  Typically,  the  smaller  the 
group, the more each member talks and the less chance there is someone will be 
left out. Also, smaller groups require less group management skill and they can 
usually  decide  faster  [Kagan  1992].  Gender  specifies  the  male/female  group 
composition. 

•  Positive interdependences. This is one of the key elements in successful groups. 
Based  on  many  studies,  psychologists  working  in  education  identified  positive 
interdependence as a feature of good learning groups [Slavin 1990]. [Collazos et 
al. 2003b] have developed various ways of structuring positive interdependences 
in  software  tools  based  on  the  interface  design  to  ensure  students  think  “we” 
instead of “me”.  
Setting  of  collaboration.  Corresponds  to  the  place  where  the  collaborative 
activity will be held. It could correspond to the classroom, workplace, home or a 
virtual space. 

• 

•  Conditions  of  collaboration.  This  specifies  the  kind  of  mediation.  It  could  be 

physically co-present or computer-mediated. 

•  Period  of  collaboration.  This  specifies  the  interval  time  in  which  the 
collaborative  activity  will  occur.  It  could  be  specified  in  minutes,  hours,  days, 
weeks, or months. 
These  elements  are  instantiated,  as  it  is  shown  in  [Table  1],  and  then  they  are 
considered  during  the  collaboration  structuring  process.  [Section  4]  shows  how  to 
instantiate and use these elements to make design decisions. 

Structuring Collaboration 

3.2 
The teacher/instructors cannot simply ask students to start the projects and encourage 
peers to learn together, but s/he should specify a collaboration process. Such process 
could include several activities. At each activity, the team has to produce something 
as a result, and team members have some role to play. The elements we propose to 
use to design the collaboration process are the following ones:  
•  Activities. This element represents the tasks that must be performed by the group 
members  during  the  collaboration  process.  This  includes  the  workflow  of 
(individual  and  collaborative)  activities  that  composes  the  process.  It  also 
includes the goals and rules of each task. There are activities performed by the 
group associated to the main goal, and others activities done by every member of 
the group related to the partial goals. On the other hand, the rules of the group 

1026

Collazos C.A., Guerrero L.A., Pino J.A., Ochoa S.F., Stahl G.: Designing ...

activity  should  be  specified.  These  rules  mediate  the  subject-community 
relationship,  and  refer  to  the  explicit  and  implicit  regulations,  norms  and 
conventions  that  constrain  actions  and  interactions  within  the  activity  system 
[Engestrom  1987].  These  rules  permit  reviewing  boundaries  and  guidelines  for 
the activity. The activities included in the collaboration process must be designed 
so that every member of the group has a similar work load [Kagan 1994]. 

•  People.  This  element  determines  the  roles  that  should  be  present  in  the 
collaboration process. Each group member has a role to play in each activity. The 
role assigns responsibilities and grants to the users. For example, in a pair reading 
exercise a student can play the role of reader. Therefore, such a student must to 
read a section for the partner. After that the reader role must rotate [Johnson et al. 
1998]. 

•  Tools.  This  issue  represents  the  tools  through  people  can  perform  the 
collaborative  activities.  These  tools  must  allow  collaborators  to  communicate, 
coordinate  and  participate  in  the  process.  Members  of  the  group  must 
communicate and coordinate  among them in order to accomplish tasks that are 
independent, that are not completely described or that require negotiation [Fussell 
1998]. Regarding participation, the idea is to define scenarios where members of 
the group have the same chances to participate to solve the situation.  

•  Objects.  The  objects  represent  the  knowledge  that  is  shared  by  the  group 
members during an activity. This knowledge can include several resources, such 
as  digital  objects,  a  portion  of  the  user  interface,  coordination  strategies, 
decisions, goals and awareness mechanisms. For example, the discussion of the 
strategies  to  solve  a  problem  helps  group  members  to  construct  a  shared  view 
(shared object) of their goals and tasks required to be executed [Fussell 1998]. 
This shared view can improve the coordination during an activity, because each 
member knows how his/er task fits into the global team goals. 
These  four  elements  can  be  used  to  structure  the  collaboration  process,  by 
considering the constraints imposed by the setup initial conditions. The goal of this 
design should be maximizing the knowledge acquired about a subject (learning goal) 
or  the  ability  of  the  student  to  assimilate  and  reproduce  a  certain  skill  (transversal 
goal), such as negotiation capability or leadership. 

3.3  Maintaining The Collaboration 
The last aspect to consider is related to the strategy that can be used to maintain the 
collaboration among  members of the group. Such strategy could be conducted by a 
cognitive mediator or by the team members. 

There is no guarantee interactions among team members actually occur. Hence, 
some  external  regulation  is  needed  to  satisfy  the  occurrences  of  those  kinds  of 
interactions.  One  way  to  provide  that  kind  of  regulation  is  through  the  cognitive 
mediator.  The  role  of  mediator  will  not  be  to  intervene  at  the  task  level,  but  to 
guarantee all the group members participate, and to frequently ask questions such as: 
What happened? What does it mean? The role of the cognitive mediator is to maintain 
the  focus  of  the  discussion,  guiding  students  through  the  knowledge  construction 

Collazos C.A., Guerrero L.A., Pino J.A., Ochoa S.F., Stahl G.: Designing ...

1027

process. As the collaboration goes on, the state of interaction is evaluated [Pinheiro et 
al. 2003]. Remedial actions may be proposed to reduce discrepancies between these 
states. Next it is presented a set of indicators that have shown to be useful to measure 
and analyze the collaboration process in learning environments. 

4  The Indicators 

[Collazos et al. 2003a] have defined five Indicators of Collaboration (IC) that allow 
measuring  and  analyzing  an  activity  carried  out  in  a  collaborative  learning 
environment. These indicators are the following ones: 
Applying  strategies  (IC1).  This  indicator  tries  to  capture  the  ability  of  the  group 
members to generate, communicate and consistently apply a strategy to jointly solve 
the problem.  
Intra-group  cooperation  (IC2).  This  indicator  refers  to  the  use  of  collaborative 
strategies previously defined during the work.  
Success criteria review (IC3). This indicator measures the degree of involvement of 
the  group  members  in  reviewing  boundaries,  guidelines  and  roles  during  the  group 
activity.  It  may  include  summarizing  the  outcome  of  the  last  task,  assigning  action 
items to group members, and noting times for expected completion of assignments.  
Monitoring (IC4). This indicator is understood as a regulatory activity. The objective 
of the indicator is to oversee if the group maintains the chosen strategies to solve the 
problem, keeping focused on the goals and the success criteria.  
Performance  (IC5).  This  refers  to  the  quality  of  the  proposed  solution  to  the 
problematic situation. The evaluation of collaborative work takes into account three 
aspects: Quality (how good is the result of collaborative work), Time (total elapsed 
time while working) and Work (total amount of work done). 

5  The Collaborative Learning Environment 

As  was explained above, a Collaborative Learning Environment (CLE) involves, at 
least,  four  elements:  people,  activities,  tools  and  objects.  For  developing  our 
environment we use a game-based learning approach. 

The tool used in our learning environment is a game –called Chase the Cheese–, 
which is played by four persons, each one using a single computer. The computers are 
physically distant. Thus, the players need to use a computer-mediated-communication 
tool. All activities made by participants are recorded for later analysis and players are 
made  aware  of  that.  Players  are  given  very  few  details  about  the  game.  The  main 
game rules and obstacles must be discovered by participants while playing. They have 
to develop joint strategies to succeed. 

The  game  has  four  quadrants.  The  goal  of  the  game  is  to  move  a  mouse  (in 
quadrant 1) to the cheese (quadrant 4). Each quadrant has a coordinator –one of the 
players–  permitted  to  move  the  mouse  with  the  arrows;  the  other  persons  can  only 
help  the  coordinator  sending  messages  which  are  seen  at  the  right-hand  side  of  the 
screen. In this way, each player has two predefined roles: coordinator (only one per 

1028

Collazos C.A., Guerrero L.A., Pino J.A., Ochoa S.F., Stahl G.: Designing ...

quadrant and randomly assigned) and collaborator. In fact, there are four partial goals 
–one per quadrantthat 
must be achieved in order to obtain the main goal. The game 
challenges  the  coordinator  of  the  quadrant  in  which  the  mouse  is  located  because 
there are obstacles that impede the mouse movements. Most obstacles are invisible to 
the quadrant coordinator, but visible to one of the other players. This feature of the 
game must be discovered by the players in order to achieve the goal. The players must 
then  develop  a  shared  strategy  to  communicate  the  obstacle  locations  to  the 
coordinator. Each participant has a partial view of the labyrinth and s/he must interact 
with  her/his  peers  to  solve  the  problem.  Each  player  (and  quadrant)  has  a  colour 
associated.  When  starting  the  movement  of  the  mouse,  the  coordinator  has  an 
individual  score  of  100  points.  Whenever  the  mouse  hits  an  obstacle,  the  score  is 
decreased 10 points. The coordinator has to lead the mouse to the cheese (in the case 
of  the  last  quadrant)  or  to  a  bridge  between  quadrants.  When  the  mouse  passes  to 
another quadrant the coordinator role is switched, and the previous score is added to 
the total score of the group. If any individual score reaches a value below or equal to 
0, the group loses the game. The goal of the game is to take the mouse to the cheese 
and to do it with a high total score. Let us see how we design the CLE according to 
the model proposed in the previous section. [Table 1] presents the initial conditions in 
our  game  software  tool.  [Table  2]  presents  the  way  we  structured  the  collaboration 
among members of the group in our tool. 
 

Setting of  Collaboration.  Classroom 
Conditions of Collabor. 
Period of Collaboration 

Computer-mediated 
45 minutes 

Table 1: Initial conditions for the software tool 

The  third  part  of  the  model  (i.e.,  maintaining  the  collaboration),  includes 
participation  of  a  cognitive  mediator.  Our  first  experiments  using  this  CLE  did  not 
include  it  in  an  explicit  way.  We  only  presented  the  information  at  the  end  of  the 
activity. However, we re-built the collaboration processes through semantic analysis 

Elements 

Type of activity 
Nature of  Collaborators 
Group heterogeneity 

 
 
 
 
Positive Interdependence 

Description 

Solve a labyrinth 
Peer to peer interaction 
The  game  is  played  by  four  people,  randomly 
selected. 
Goal  interdependence,  because,  there  is  a  common 
goal, in that case, lead the mouse to its cheese. 
Role interdependence: There are two predefined roles, 
coordinator and collaborators. 
Resource  interdependence:  Every  member  of  the 
group has information that the other ones need. They 
have a partial view of the labyrinth, because they have 
information about their own colourful obstacles. 
Reward  interdependence:  Group  members  not  only 
must lead the mouse to its cheese but arrive with the 
highest score.  

Collazos C.A., Guerrero L.A., Pino J.A., Ochoa S.F., Stahl G.: Designing ...

1029

of the messages, and so, we determined the degree of collaboration measured by some 
IC. The cognitive mediator and/or participants could interpret the results and decide 
what  actions  (if  any)  to  take,  in  order  to  improve  the  collaboration  [Collazos  et  al. 
2003c].  It  could  be  possible  that  students,  who  view  and  analyze  the  IC  values 
[Collazos et al. 2003a] may learn to understand and improve their own interaction. 

Description 
Global: Lead the mouse to its cheese. 
Partial: Pass through every traffic light icon. 
Rules: The coordinator is the only person able to move the 
mouse. When the score gets to 0, the game is over. 
Coordinator: one per quadrant. 
Collaborators: the three remaining. 
The system provides some dialogue boxes, where every 
participant can send messages to a member or the group. 
Also, there is a message reception mailbox. 
In order to guarantee equal participation of all members of 
the group, the labyrinth was designed with a similar 
complexity in every quadrant. The number of obstacles and 
their distribution was similar in all the quadrants. 

Table 2: Structuring the collaboration 

 

Elements 

 
Activities 

People (roles) 

Objects 
(Communication) 

 
Objects 
(Participation) 

6  Experiments 

The designed CLE was used in an experiment involving 11 groups of four students, 
whom  carry  out  the  before  explained  collaboration  process.  The  groups  that 
participated in the initial experiment were the following ones: 
Group 0: A group of graduate students from the “Collaborative Systems” course at a 
Uuniversity of Chile, with some experience on collaborative work techniques. 
Group 1-4: Four groups of high school students. They were about 15 years old. Two 
of  the  groups  were  randomly  chosen  (G.1  and  2)  and  the  remaining  ones  included 
friends (G.5 and 6). 
Group 5: A randomly selected group, i.e., people that have never worked together. 
Group 6: Friends who have worked as a group many times before this experiment and 
that have a good personal relationship. 
Groups  7-10:  Four  groups  of  graduate  students,  from  the  University  of  Cauca, 
Colombia (Groups 7, 8, 9, 10). 

 
[Table 3] presents the obtained results. Every IC is computed with a 0-1 range, 
where 1  means the  highest score. Although some  groups  got a  good score in  some 
indicators,  we  can  see  that  almost  all  groups  were  ineffective  collaborative  groups 

1030

Collazos C.A., Guerrero L.A., Pino J.A., Ochoa S.F., Stahl G.: Designing ...

because they were weak in collaborative attitudes (IC3). The rest of the indicators are 
acceptable, since most of them are over 0.5. 

 

 

1 

IC1 IC2 IC3 IC4 IC5
Group 1 0.69 0.69 0.2  0.75 0.65
Group 2 0.31 0.71 0.2  0.80 0.57
Group 3 0.71 0.74 0.8  0.78 0.66
Group 4 0.75 0.84
0.86 0.61
Group 5 0.68 0.62 0.2  0.80 0.69
Group 6 0.48 0.61 0.5  0.74 0.63
Group 7 0.71 0.72
0.85 0.52
Group 8 0.47 0.80 0.2  0.80 0.53
Group 9 0.27 0.75 0.2  0.82 0.54
Group 10 0.28 0.75 0.2  0.81 0.54
Group 11 0.48 0.80 0.2  0.83 0.53

1 

Table 3: Experimental Results 

Students have two responsibilities in cooperative learning situations: (a) learn the 
assigned  material,  and  (b)  ensure  that  all  members  of  the  group  learn  the  assigned 
material  [Johnson  et  al.  1978]. The  second  aspect  is  something  that  never  occurred 
during the collaborative learning processes of our groups. Of course, nobody told the 
group  members  they  should  have  a  collaborative  attitude.  Many  hypotheses  can  be 
developed to explain  why these attitudes did not appear spontaneously: perhaps the 
students initially thought the game was very easy, or maybe they felt pressured to play 
instead of stopping to think carefully what to do, etc. 

By  means  of  educational  games  learners  should  be  able  to  apply  factual 
knowledge,  learn  on  demand,  gain  experiences  in  the  virtual  world  that  can  later 
shape their behavioural patterns and directly  influence their reflection.  Learners are 
encouraged  to  combine  knowledge  from  different  areas  to  choose  a  solution  or  to 
make  a  decision  at  a  certain  point,  learners  can  test  how  the  outcome  of  the  game 
changes  based  on  their  decisions  and  actions.  Despite  the  fact  our  learning 
environment  includes  many  of  the  elements  proposed  in  our  model  the  results 
obtained were not the best. What matters is not just the design of the environment, nor 
even the design of a single task or curricular unit. Rather, the cultivation of minds, 
which  itself  requires  engagement  in  a  social  process  of  meaning  appropriation, 
requires the whole environment, not just the computer program, be designed as a well 
orchestrated  whole.  This  includes  key  elements,  such  as  curriculum,  teacher’s 
behaviour,  collaborative  tasks,  mode  of  collaboration  and  interaction,  tasks  and 
learning goals. 

7  Conclusions and Future Work 

The  design  of  well-specified  environments  could  induce  collaborative  learning 
activities within a group. So, it is important to carefully define every activity that is 

Collazos C.A., Guerrero L.A., Pino J.A., Ochoa S.F., Stahl G.: Designing ...

1031

part of the process, in order to promote collaboration. This paper presented a model to 
design  CLE  and  a  set  of  indicator  to  measure  the  collaboration  process  in  such 
environments.  The  design  model 
therefore  almost  any 
teacher/instructor could use it. This model attempts to support collaboration in CLEs 
through two ways: structuring the situation in which the collaboration takes place (set 
up  initial  conditions  and  structuring  the  collaboration),  and,  structuring  the 
collaboration 
the 
collaboration).   

through  coaching  or  self 

(maintaining 

is  easy 

to  apply; 

itself 

regulation 

Based on the obtained results, we believe it is not only important to design the 
tool supporting the collaboration process, but also to consider other aspects such as 
teacher’s participation and learning goals, in order to have an effective CLE. The use 
of the proposed indicators allows us to identify strengths and weaknesses of the CLE 
we  designed.  It  means  the  indicators  are  useful  to  evaluate  this  kind  of  learning 
environments.  In  addition,  the  indicators  fits  with  the  proposed  model,  allowing  to 
teachers/instructors adjust the CLE based on the feedback given by these metrics. In 
future  versions,  we  will  build  tools  that  monitor  on-line  the  state  of  the  interaction 
among participants, model the state of the interaction and provide collaborators with 
visualizations that can be used to self-diagnose the collaboration. 

Acknowledgements 
This  work  was  partially  funded  by  Spanish  Ministry  of  Science  and  Tech.,  CICYT 
Project ADACO (TIN 2004-08000-C03-03), Colciencias (Colombia) Proj. Nº 4128-
14-18008 & 030-2005, and Fondecyt (Chile) grant Nº 1040952 and 11060467. 

References 
[Anderson 1993] Anderson, J. Rules of the mind. Mahwah, N.J.: Lauwrence Erlbaum, 1993. 
[Bannon  1989]  Bannon,  L.,  Issues  in  computer-supported  collaborative  learning,  NATO 
Advanced workshop on computer-supported collaborative learning, Italy, Sept. 1989.  
[Collazos et al 2003a] Collazos, C, Guerrero, L.A., Pino, J., Ochoa, S. Evaluating collaborative 
learning processes. Lecture Notes in Computer Science 2440, 2003, 203-221. 
[Collazos et al. 2003b] Collazos, C, Guerrero, L.A., Pino, J, Ochoa, S, Collaborative Scenarios 
to promote positive interdependence among group members. LNCS 2806, 2003, 356-370. 
[Collazos et al. 2003c] Collazos, C., Guerrero, L.A., Pino, J, Ochoa, S., Improving the use of 
strategies in Computer-Supported Collaborative Processes. LNCS  2806, 2003, 247-260. 
[Collazos et al. 2006] Collazos, C., Guerrero, L., Pino, J., Stahl, G., Ochoa, S., A Model and a 
Game for Investigating and Designing Collaborative Learning Environments, SIIE 2006, León, 
España, Octubre, 2006. 
[Di  Blas  et  al.  2005]  Di  Blas,  N.,  Paolini,  P.,  Poggi,  C.  3D  Worlds  for  Edutainment: 
Eduactional,  Relational  and  Organizational  Principles.  Proc.  3rd.  Int.  Conf.  on  pervasive 
Computing and Communications Workshops, 2005. 
[Dillenbourg  1992]  Dillenbourg,  P.,  The  computer  as  a  constructorium:  Tools  for  observing 
one’s own learning. Elsom-Cook & Moyse (Eds.), Know. Negotiation, London: Acad. Press, 
1992. 

1032

Collazos C.A., Guerrero L.A., Pino J.A., Ochoa S.F., Stahl G.: Designing ...

[Dillenbourg  1999]  Dillenbourg,  P.,  What  do  you  mean  by  collaborative  learning?  In 
Dillenbourg (Ed.) Collaborative-Learning: Cognitive & Comput. Approaches. Oxford:Elsevier, 
1999, 1-19. 
[Engestrom 1987] Engestrom, Y., Learning by expanding: an activity-theoretical approach to 
development research. Orienta-Konsultit Oy, Helsinki, 1987. 
[Fussell  1998]  Fussell,  S.,  Coordination,  overload  and  team  performance:  effects  of  team 
communication strategies. CSCW’98, Chapel Hill NC, 1998, 275-284. 
[Gifford et al. 1999] Gifford, B., Enyedy, N. Activity centered Design: Towards a Theoretical 
Framework for CSCL. Proc. 1999 Conf. on Computer Support for Collaborative Learning, Palo 
Alto, CA, 1999. 
[Johnson et al. 1978] Johnson, D., Johnson, R.: Cooperative, competitive, and individualistic 
learning. Journal of Research and Development in Education, Vol. 12, pp. 8 –15, 1978. 
[Johnson  et  al.  1986]  Johnson,  D.W.  Stanne,  M.,  A  comparison  of  computer-assisted 
cooperative,  competitive,  and  individualistic  learning.  Am.  Educational  Research  Journal  23, 
1986, 382-392. 
[Johnson  et  al.  1998]  Johnson  D.,  Johnson  R,  Holubec,  E.,  Cooperation  in  the  classroom. 
Interaction Book Company, Edina, MN, 1998. 
[Kagan  1992]  Kagan,  S.,  Cooperative  learning.  San  Juan  Capistrano,  CA:  Kagan  Coop. 
Learning, 1992. 
[Kagan 1994] Kagan, S., Kagan, M., The structural approach: six keys to coop. learning. In S. 
Sharon (Ed.), Handbook of coop. learn. meth., Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1994, 115-133. 
[Pinheiro  et  al.  2003]  Pinheiro,  M.  K.,  Lima,  J.  V.,  Borges,  M.  R.  S.,  A  framework  for 
awareness support in groupware systems, Computers in Industry, 52(1), p.47 - 57, 2003. 
[Santoro  et  al.  2005]  Santoro,  F.M.,    Borges,  M.  R.  S.,  Santos,  N.,  Learning  to  Plan  the 
Collaborative Design Process, Lecture Notes in Computer Science v.3168, p.33 - 44, 2005. 
[Slavin 1988] Slavin, R., Cooperative learning and student achievement. In R.E. Slavin (Ed), 
School and clasrron organization. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1988. 
[Slavin  1990]  Slavin,  R.,  Cooperative  learning:  Theory,  research  and  practice.  Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1990. 
[Stahl 2002] Stahl, G., Rediscovering CSCL. In Koschman, T., Hall, R., & Miyake, N., (Eds.), 
CSCL2:  Carrying  forward  the  conversation,  Lawrence  Erlbaum  Associates,  Hillsdale,  NJ., 
pp.169-181, 2002. 
[Wertsch 1979] Wertsch, J. The concept of Activity in Soviet Psychology: An Introduction. In 
J. Wertsch (ed.): The concept of Activity in Soviet Psychology. Armonk, N.Y.; M.E. Sharpe, 
Inc., 1979. 

