Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Sloan School of Management
Center for Coordination Science

Coordinating Information Using Genres

Takeshi Yoshioka and George Herman

CCS WP #214  SWP # 4127

August 2000

77 Massachusetts Avenue, NE20-336, Cambridge, MA 02139

web: http://ccs.mit.edu/ccsmain.html

Coordinating Information Using Genres

 Takeshi Yoshioka
Fuji Xerox Co., Ltd.
tyoshioka@acm.org

Abstract

for  coordinating 

In this paper, we demonstrate how a community may use
genres 
information.  Genres  help
coordinate  information  related  to  resources,  place  and
time  since  members  in  the  community  have  enacted
genres  in  the  past  and  have  expectations  of  the  socially
recognized  information  that  genres  bring.    Using  the
HICSS  website,  we  illustrate  that  genres  are  used  for
coordinating 
information 
of
aspects 
coordination  mechanisms 
divisibility,
concurrency,  accessibility  and  timing  that  help  people
improve  the  coordination  of  work  processes.  We  model
these  aspects  using  the  Process  Handbook,  a  process
knowledge repository developed at MIT, and suggest that
system  designers  and  users  may  benefit  from  an  explicit
recognition of the coordination provided by using genres
and  by  exploration  of  similar  coordination  through  the
use of this repository.

addressing 
such 
as 

1. Introduction

We need to see the way documents have served not
simply  to  write,  but  also  to  underwrite  social
interactions;  not  simply  to  communicate,  but  also
to coordinate social practices
 [John Seely Brown, and Paul Duguid, The Social
Life of Document [6]]

According  to  an  Internet  domain  survey  in  January
2000 [24], there are approximately 72 million hosts from
over  240  countries  connected  to  the  Internet.  It  is
becoming  trite  to  say  that  the  growth  of  the  Internet  has
had  an  enormous  impact  on  communication.  It  has
diminished  the  importance  of  geographic  dispersion  in
establishing  electronic  communities.  Allowing  electronic
participation  from  around  the  globe  has  a  concomitant
complexity  of  having  different  cultural  norms  for
communication 
from  different  communities  mixed
together.  As  Brown  and  Duguid  mention  “In  passing
communities, documents play an important role, bringing
people  from  different  groups  together  to  negotiate  and
coordinate  common  practice”  [6].  Documents  play  a
central  role  for  global  communication,  and  digital
documents  used  via  the  Internet  enable  us  to  integrate  a
wider  variety  of  communicative  actions  than  paper

Page 2

 George Herman

     Center for Coordination Science, MIT

gherman@MIT.EDU

and 

documents.  For  example,  the  web  pages  of  Center  for
Coordination Science at MIT [26] offer information about
research status, demonstrate a prototype of software, offer
reference  links,  discuss  topics  related  to  a  project,  allow
searching for information, allow sending of comments and
so on.

communicative 

the  community 

The  more  diverse 

that  performs
communicative  actions,  the  more  important  it  is  to
facilitate 
coordinate
information  involved  with  their  communication,  because
different  people  have  different  expectations  and
anticipations for their communicative actions due to their
experience  with  the  norms  and  conventions  of  the
communities to which they belong.

actions 

Genres,  which  are  socially  recognized  patterns  for
communicative actions [19], provide one of the sources of
norms  and  conventions  for  communication.  Genres  of
communication have existed through history, and include
such  examples  as  a  business  letter  or  thank  you  note.  A
genre,  such  as  thank  you  note  has  certain  socially
expected  attributes 
that  may  differ  within  different
cultures. For example, in one culture, thank you notes for
wedding gifts should be sent within six weeks; in others,
within a year might be acceptable; in others, no thank you
notes are expected at all. The rise of the Internet has had
an impact on the evolution of certain genres. In this paper,
we address genres in the 33rd HICSS web pages and how
the Internet has enabled a different way of utilizing these
genres.

Current  research  on  Internet  based  genres  has
primarily  focussed  on  new  functionality  [17,  18]  and
relationship with existing paper-based genres [7, 8]. While
we address that also, we extend this to address how new
genres  may  be  developed  by  using  Coordination  Theory
[11].  We  also  concentrate  on 
the  purpose  of
communication  and  show  how  a  Genre  Taxonomy  [22]
can  be  used  to  help  in  finding  alternatives.  This  work
extends that of Charley Osborn [16] to emphasize genres.
In  the  next  section,  we  will  discuss  genres  and  their
role in coordinating information. In Section 3, we discuss
coordination 
the  Process
Handbook.  In  Section  4,  we  bring  these  two  theories
together. In  Section  5  we  illustrate  this  combined  theory
using the HICSS web site as an illustrative example.
2. Genre and Coordinating Information

theory  and  a 

tool  called 

2.1. Genre Theories

Genres as a concept have a long tradition in rhetorical
and literary analysis [1]. Recently, researchers in cultural,
rhetorical and design studies have begun using it to refer
to a typified social action [2, 3, 4, 5, 13]. Orlikowski and
Yates  applied  this  notion  of  genres  to  organizational
communications such as business letters, memos, face-toface 
 meetings,  reports,  announcements  and  so  on.  They
defined  genres  as  “socially 
types  of
communicative action habitually enacted by members of a
community 
to  realize  particular  communicative  and
collaborative  purposes”  [19  pp.299],  and  identify  genres
by  their  socially  recognized  purpose  and  by  their  shared
common characteristics of form.

recognized 

The  purpose  of  a  genre  is  not  an  individual’s  private
motive 
for  communication,  but  a  purpose  which
participants in a community socially recognize and invoke
in  a  typical  situation,  such  as  proposing  a  project,
informing and directing in an official announcement, and
deciding how to resolve a  problem.  Form  refers  to  three
aspects  of  observable  communication:  medium,  such  as
pen  and  paper  and  electronic  mail;  structural  features,
such as document format; and linguistic features, such as
informality, humor and technical language.

Recently, many researchers have focussed on genres in
electronic  communication  [e.g.  10,  18]  and  relationships
between  genres  such  as  genre  repertoire  [14],  a  genre
system [15, 20, 21] and a genre ecology [9].  In this paper
we mainly focussed on genres as part of a genre system. A
genre  system  is  sequence  of  communicative  actions.  A
digital  document  such  as  a  web  page  is  frequently  a
constituent  of  a  genre  system  because  of  its  hyperlink
structure, which tends to group certain pages together for
a single purpose.

We  used  the  example  of  the  web  pages  for  the  33rd
HICSS  which  include  many  genres  such  as  the  call  for
papers genre, the conference brochures genre, the author
instruction genre, the conference registration form genre,
and  so  on.  Each  of 
these  genres  carries  socially
recognized  purposes  and  characteristics  of  form.  For
example,  a  ‘call  for  papers’  is  understood  to  include
information  about  the  topics  of  acceptable  papers,  form
that the papers must take, to whom to send the papers and
by  when,  etc.  The  purpose  is  to  gather  papers  for  the
intent of presentation and/or publication at the conference.
All of this information is conveyed by the phrase ‘call for
papers.’

2.2. Coordinating information using genre

When  the  members  in  a  community  enact  genres
and/or  genre  systems, 
they  bring  expectations  of
communicative purpose, content, form, participants,  time

Page 3

and  place.  [15]  Orlikowski  and  Yates  claim  “a  genre
system1  can  structure  and  choreograph  multi-party
interactions  within  and  across  organization.”  [15  p.6]  In
our  terms,  genres  are  used  to  ensure  that  the  right
information is received at the right place at the right time
with trust. In this context, ‘right’ is that which is socially
accepted  and  ‘trust’  is  in  accordance  with  socially
recognized 
communication
sequence and form.

participants, 

purpose, 

As  shown  in  Figure  1,  in  enacting  a  genre  process,
members  identify  genre  rules  from  their  prior  genre
experiences  and  select  a  proper  genre.  This  is  usually
done implicitly, but occasionally may be explicit (“Should
I  send  a  business  letter  or  an  email?”).  They  usually
reproduce  a  genre,  but  sometimes  elaborate,  replace  or
undercut it either inadvertently or deliberately in order to
adapt to a change of situation. A sender of communication
usually chooses or modifies a genre from within his or her
genre  experience;  recipients  invoke  a  similar  recurrent
situation  and  identify  the  genre  or  genre  variant.  If  the
sender  and  recipient  endorse  the  same  genre,  the  genre
coordinates information exchanged in the communicative
action,  because  participants  come 
the
information from the social context implicitly.

to  recognize 

Enact genre
Identify genre rules
Reproduce genre
Elaborate genre
Replace with
different genre
Undercut genre

Select
genre

Reinforce/Undercut

Ongoing use

Observe genre use
Be influenced by genre use

Identify a situation

Identify a change

of situation

Figure 1. Process cycle of genre over use

3.  Coordination  theory  and  the  Process
Handbook

In  this  section  we  briefly  introduce  Coordination
Theory  and  a  knowledge  repository  developed  at  the
Center 
for  Coordination  Science  at  MIT.  More
information can be found at [25].

3.1. Coordination theory

Malone and Crowston propose a coordination  theory,
where coordination is defined as managing dependencies
among activities. They propose three types of elementary

                                                
1 A single genre can also structure and choreograph multi-party
interactions within and across organization, because a genre as well as a
genre system has expectations. For detail, see [22].

dependencies:  flow,  fit  and  sharing  (figure  22).  A  flow
dependency  arises  whenever  an  activity  produces  a
resource or resources which are used by another activity.
Fit  dependency  occurs  whenever  multiple  activities
collectively  produce  the  same  resource,  and  a  sharing
dependency occurs whenever the same resources are used
by multiple activities.

Figure 2. Flow, Fit and sharing dependencies
Processes called coordination mechanisms manage the
relationships  represented  by  dependencies.  A 
flow
dependency  has  coordination  mechanisms,  which  ensure
the provision of the right resource at  the  right  place  and
right  time.    For  example,  a  process  to  provide  resources
just in time  is  a  coordination  mechanism  that  manages  a
flow dependency. Another coordination mechanism would
be to build a stock of inventory in advance.

3.2. The Process Handbook

The  Process  Handbook  [11,  25]  has  been  under
development  at  the  Center  for  Coordination  Science  at
MIT  for  over  seven  years.  The  goal  of  the  Process
Handbook  project  is  to  develop  a  process  repository
which  contains  a  generic  framework  for  classifying
business  processes,  including  selected  examples  of  "best
practices,"  case  studies,  and  other  process  descriptions,
with integrated tools for viewing, retrieving and authoring
process knowledge.

The Process Handbook has two key concepts: process
inheritance, and the distinction between processes and the
dependencies  among  them  using  the  coordination  theory
above.

in 

the  Process  Handbook.  One 

There  are  two  hierarchies  that  represent  process
inheritance 
is  a
decomposition  hierarchy,  a  “has-a”  relationship  network
between activities (i.e., X has a Y), in which an activity in
Process  Handbook  is  broken  down  into  its  subactivities.
The  other 
is  a  specialization  hierarchy,  an  “is-a”
relationship network between activities (i.e., X is a Y), in
which  an  activity  inherits  the  attributes  from  its  parent
activities. This specialization hierarchy is similar to object
oriented programming, but it is specialized in terms not of
objects  (nouns)  but  processes  (verbs).  Figure  3  shows  a
sample specialization and decomposition hierarchy among
three different sales activities in the Process Handbook.
                                                
2 Figure 2 and Figure 3 are borrowed from ‘Tools for inventing
organizations: Toward a handbook of organizational processes [11]

Page 4

Figure 3. An example of inheritance of process
hierarchy 
are
shadowed)

subactivities 

(Changed 

4.  Coordinating  information  using  HICSS
web pages

the  conferences 

interested 
to 

in 
interact.  Although  an 

These  days,  many  international  conferences  use  web
pages  to  exchange  information  and  to  allow  people  who
from  various
are 
communities 
international
conference 
is  often  held  by  one  community  at  a
department  or  research  center,  it  also  includes  and
intersects  many  other  communities  such  as  scholars,
personnel  at  the  institution,  people  at  the  site  of  the
conference, student volunteers and so on. Even among the
scholars, there are sub-communities such  as  the  program
committee, the program chairs, the authors of papers, and
participants.

HICSS is a good example to illustrate how the Internet
and  web  pages  have  enabled  a  different  way  of  utilizing
genres.  It  has  participants  from  around  the  world,  and  it
includes  various  communities  related  to  information
technology as announced below in the general information
web page [23]:

“The  objective  of  HICSS  is  to  provide  a  unique
environment in which researchers and practitioners in the
information, computer and system sciences can exchange
ideas, techniques and applications”

4.1. Genres in 33rd HICSS web pages

We  elicited  genres  in  33rd  HICSS  web  pages  [23]
mainly  by  identifying  the  purpose  of  communicative
actions.  We  identified  eight  genres,  and  a  genre  system
below. (Table1) Each  of    these  genres  and  genre  system
evokes an expectation in the conference community.

The  general  conference  information  genre  has  as  its
purpose 
inform  all  participants  and  potential
participants in HICSS about the conference. The structure
of this HICSS home page, in which the top page has frame
structure  and  categorized  hyper  links  from  the  list  of
the  general
contents,  helps  participants 
conference information genre and other genres such as the
conference  brochure  genre.  Some  genres  such  as  the

to  enact 

to 

conference registration form genre are replicas of typical
paper-based genres, and as such, participants can deduce
their purposes easily. Note that the genres in 33rd HICSS
web  make  up  the  conference  genre  system,  which  also
the  conference  paper
includes 
reviewing genre system, the conference paper submission
genre system, the proceedings genre, and so on.

the  meeting  genre, 

Table 1. Genres and genre system of HICSS web
pages
Genre
General
conference
information
genre

Purpose features
Announce general
information to
participants

Web pages
apahome3.htm

Conference
brochure
genre

Inform about  program
information and solicit
participation

overview.pdf,
tutorials.htm,
lecture.htm,
plenary.htm,
advise.htm
Made up of the
next four genres

h33cfp.htm

author.htm,
abstract.htm,
submit.htm,
copyright.pdf,
confreg.htm

Submit conference
papers

Solicit papers and
inform about necessary
information such as
tracks
Guide authors how to
write and submit
papers

Register for the
conference

Conference
paper
submission
genre system
Call for
papers
genre

Author
instruction
genre

Conference
registration
form genre
Request form
genre

Hotel
registration
form genre
Travel
information
genre

Request equipment

av.htm

Register for the hotel

Inform  about  travel
information

hotelreg.htm,
hotelreg.pdf

travel.htm

The  call  for  papers  genre,  author  instruction  genre,
the  conference  registration  form  genre,  and  the  request
form genre are parts of the conference paper submission
genre system. This system consists of genres coordinating
the  communicative  actions  expected  for  submitting
conference papers.  These genres make up a system, since
there  is  an  expected  sequence.    First,  potential  authors
read  the  instructions  and  write  an  abstract.  Second,  they
submit to a mini-track chair by 3/15, and write a full paper
and  send  it  to  a  mini-track  chair  by  6/1.  After  receiving
notification  from  the  mini-track  chair  of  whether  their
paper  is  accepted  or  not,  they  submit  a  final  version  of
their  paper  to  IEEE  by  10/1.  Authors  also  need  to
complete  and  send  an  audio-visual  request  form  and  a
conference registration form by 10/1.  Each genre  in  the
conference  paper  submission  genre  system,  such  as  the

Page 5

author  instruction  genre,  the  notification  genre,  and  the
paper genre, relates to the sequence above. They interlock
such  that  the  communicative  action  associated  with  one
genre is a precondition of the next genre’s communicative
action.

4.2. Coordinating information using the genres in
the 33rd HICSS web pages

In 

this  subsection,  we 

illustrate  how  a  genre
coordinates  information  in  terms  of  its  usefulness,  place
and  time,  using  the  examples  of  the  general  conference
information genre and the call for papers genre.

Suppose  that  a  senior  researcher  in  the  IT  field  who
we’ll  call  Tom  finds  the  HICSS  web  pages  and  looks
through 
them.  He  recognizes  (though  maybe  only
implicitly)  that  the  web  pages  comprise  a  set  of  genres
associated with a conference, even if he has not seen this
media  (web  pages)  used  for  this  purpose  before.  Tom
knows of other conferences and he can recognizes genres
relevant to conference information due to its purpose and
form features, such as a list of related web pages.

The general conference information genre coordinates
the  flow  of  general  conference  information  from  the
conference chairman, the conference administrator and the
track administrator to all the participants of HICSS. In this
genre,  information  about  the  conference  contents  and
features  relates  to  how  useful  the  conference  will  be;
important  date  information  relates  to  time;  and  the
conference venue information relates to place. When Tom
considers  participating  in  this  conference,  he  uses  the
information  about  the  conference  contents  and  features
from the general information genre to determine whether
to  join  this  research  community  and  interchange  ideas
related  to  his  research.  He  uses  the  date  and  conference
venue  information  in  interacting  with  his  other  activities
such as planning his business trip. Tom uses the genre to
coordinate his activities.

The web page of the HICSS  call  for  papers  includes
information  about  tracks,  important  dates,  and  brief
instructions  for  paper  submission.  From  the  title  of  the
page  and  the  contents  necessary  to  submit  papers,  the
members in the community recognize the  call  for  papers
genre. They recognize its purpose as soliciting papers and
informing  about  necessary  information  to  submit  papers.
The  format  and  content  of  this  genre  usually  includes
information about submitting a paper such as: the kind of
topics are suitable and presented in a track; how to write a
paper  (media,  format  etc.);  how  the  submission  process
will work with due dates; and to whom and where a paper
should be submitted.

The information above is used by a variety of people.
Tom uses it in writing and submitting a paper, the minitrack 
 chair  in  notifying  him  about  receipt  of  the  paper,

reviewers in reviewing papers and the mini-track chair on
acceptance  of  the  paper.  The  coordination  of  these
activities has its foundation in the information in the call
for  papers  genre,  because  through  its  enactment,  each
participant  has  expectations  in  terms  of  paper  contents,
paper format, paper submitting process, paper submission
place, and so on.

In the following subsections, we identify coordination
mechanisms related to resource usability, time and place,
and illustrate how web pages play these genre roles on the
HICSS web pages. In Section 5, we will explore how we
can analyze and  improve  these  coordination  mechanisms
by looking at the relationship between work processes and
genres using the Process Handbook.

4.3. Coordination aspects related to resources

As  stated  above,  a  flow  dependency  occurs  when  a
resource  produced  by  one  activity  is  consumed  by
another.  Coordination  of  this  dependency  depends  upon
certain attributes of the resource: divisibility, concurrency
and reusability.  Divisibility  refers  to  how  a  resource  can
be divided without losing its  utility.  For  example,  water,
money  or  chocolate  can  be  divided  into  smaller  units.
Concurrency means that multiple users can use the  same
resource  at  the  same  time  (e.g.  a  web  page).  Reusability
means  the  same  resource  may  be  used  multiple  times
without being consumed. In this section we describe how
the  genres  elicited  from  HICSS  web  pages  coordinate
information as a resource.

The intangible nature of information makes it easy to
use concurrently or reuse. Dividing information addresses
the  level  of  granularity.  In  the  call  for  papers  genre,
information  about  each  track  is  divided  into  mini-tracks,
using the hyper-link functionality of the web. If Tom has
experience  in  submitting  a  paper  to  a  conference,  Tom
could  anticipate  some  of  the  processes  in  submitting
papers. Tom might expect that  the  conference  is  divided
into  tracks,  and  search  for  a  suitable  track  to  which  to
submit  the  manuscript  by  looking  through  the  track
information.  In  this  method,  the  decision  about  which
paper is being submitted to which mini-track is divided by
Tom  into  the  appropriate  mini-track  before  submission.
Another method might be if HICSS had a system in which
the  chair  gathered  all  manuscripts  and  then  he  or  she
chooses  suitable  tracks  for  the  manuscripts,  dividing  the
submissions  after  submission.  If  this  were  the  case,  less
information  about  mini-tracks  would  be  necessary.
Choosing  whether  to  divide  a  resource  before  or  after
moving is a basic coordination mechanism decision.

The  hyper-link  structure  (genre  form)  of  the  call  for
papers page allows authors to selectively look at only the
information relative to the mini-track to which they wish
to submit.  It also helps the track chairs check that papers
are submitted to only one mini-track.

Page 6

As  information  is  much  easier  to  transport  than
physical resources, there is a wider choice of coordination
mechanisms  for  concurrency  and  reusability.  One  of  the
reasons  to  use  web  pages  for  the  general  conference
information could be to provide the same information to
all the people who connect via the Internet concurrently.
However,  in  order  to  encourage  regular  participants  to
participate  in  the  conference,  the  conference  chair  might
send  both  the  same  information  and  additionally  tailor
other information just for them such as adding greetings,
using  other  media,  such  as  a  paper  brochure,  and
individual e-mail for calling for submission of a paper.

There  are  two  types  of  coordination  mechanisms
related  to  reusability:  the  content  of  information  and  the
design of genres.  For the former, in order to coordinate
paper  submission  processes  among  a  mini-track  chair,
paper reviewers and authors, important dates such as due
of  abstract  submission  are  represented  repeatedly  in  the
general conference information genre, the call for papers
genre  and  the  author  instruction  genres.  For  the  latter
case,  the  forms  of  HICSS  33rd  web  pages  seem  to  be
copied  from  those  of  previous  conferences.  It  allows
previous  participants  to  reuse  the  information  present  in
previous HICSS web pages. It also facilitates the speed of
developing  the  process  in  that  the  planners  of  the
conference  can  replicate 
the  planning  process  and
designers  of  the  web  pages  can  easily  coordinate  their
processes.  As one of the forms of the hotel registration
form genre is an Adobe Acrobat format, it seems a reuse
of  the  genre  from  the  paper  medium.    This  type  of
replication from paper media to digital media also relates
to 
reusability  coordination  mechanism  above.
Members in a community can enact the genre easily due to
same  look,  and  designers  can  elaborate  genre  rapidly  by
simply digitizing.

the 

Genres  are  used  to  ensure  the  right  information  is

gathered and used in the work processes.

4.4. Coordination aspects related to time

the 

and  provides 

The  temporal  aspect  of  coordination  relates  to  the
timing and sequence of activities. Participants in a genre
or  genre  system  have  expectations  about  time  such  as  a
deadline  or  due  date.  The  call  for  papers  genre  lists  the
important  dates, 
coordination
mechanisms  related 
to  processes  of  submission  of
abstracts,  manuscripts  and  final  papers  explicitly.  The
genre could also  provide  an  implicit  timing  coordination
mechanism. For example, Tom could try to negotiate the
deadline of manuscript submission with a mini-track chair,
by  looking  at  the  duration  between  the  due  date  of
manuscript submission and that of final paper submission
and comparing that to a typical paper submission process
with  which  he  has  had  prior  experience.  He  is  using  his
genre experience to negotiate a change.

 As genres in a genre system interlock, participants in
the genre system have expectations about the sequence of
activities related to the constituent genres.  As illustrated
in  Section  4.1,  the  participants  could  have  expectations
about  the  sequence  of  paper  submission  processes  from
prior  experience  with  the  conference  paper  submission
genre  system.  Tom  enacts 
the  genre  system  and
recognizes  implicitly  the  paper  submission  processes  of
HICSS through identifying the differences with his typical
paper submission processes. One effective way to manage
the  sequence  of  processes  using  a  genre  system  is  to
design the system such that each constituent genre applies
to  an  activity  in  the  sequence,  and  related  genres  are
interlocked  by  a  prerequisite  requirement.  For  example,
considering  the  genres  in  the  33rd  HICSS  web  pages,  a
designer can design it such that the hotel registration form
genre and conference registration form genre are activated
only  after  a  date  when  participants  can  register.  Indeed,
this  is  how  it  was  designed:  until  March  20th,  2000,
people could only look at the call for papers genre for the
34th HICSS and not register.

As  is  evident  from  the  above  examples,  web-based
genres  and  genre  systems  tend  to  change  forms  and
contents frequently, because it is easier to create variants
electronically  than  with  paper  forms.  When  designing  a
genre  or  genre  system,  it  is  worth  considering  that  a
participant  in  the  community  might  be  confused  if  the
genre  system’s  constituents  have  changed  between
accesses. Also, he or she might not recognize a variant of
a genre system if they have enacted a similar, but different
genre  system  in  the  past  and  they  assume  that  all  of  the
constituents  are  the  same  as  the  previous  one.  A
participant might access a  genre  system  more  than  once.
As an example  using  the  call  for  papers  genre,  consider
the implications of using chronological changes of a genre
for  coordination.  Suppose  that  the  genre  had  changed
three times by the end of the conference:
First,  the  genre  had  preliminary  information:  a  list  of
tracks  and  mini-tracks,  which  were  a  copy  of  the  last
conference.  Second,  the  genre  had  the  entire  set  of
information  about  tracks  and  mini-tracks  such  as  chairs,
important dates, track and mini-track summaries. Third, a
mini-track chair was changed in the genre.

Tom  had  originally  planned  to  submit  a  paper  to  the
digital  document  mini-track.  He  prepared  a  manuscript
applicable to the mini-track, but when he saw the second
version  of  the  genre,  he  found  that  there  was  no  digital
document  mini-track 
the
manuscript to be suitable for an alternative mini-track, but
failed to send it to the right mini-track chair, because he
only  saw  the  second  version  of  the  genre  and  was  not
aware that  the chair changed in the third version.

this  year.  He  modified 

Genre  systems  can  ensure  that  the  information  is

available at the right time, in the right sequence.

Page 7

4.5. Coordination aspects related to place

Place  means  having  the  needed  resource  in  the  right
place  for  use.  It  entails  two  approaches  to  coordination
mechanisms: how to either move a resource to the activity
that  will  use  it  or  control  access  to  the  resource  at  the
place where it is produced.

Participants in a genre have expectations about place.
When participants enact genres using the Internet media,
there  are  coordination  mechanisms  for  both  online  and
physical  locations.  If  the  participants  are  widespread
there  are  usually  coordination
around 
mechanisms  specified  as 
the
information.  The  call  for  papers  genre  has  descriptions
about where and how authors should submit manuscript as
shown below:

the  world, 

to  deliver 

to  how 

Many  Minitracks  accept  electronic  submissions
(usually in Word or PDF). Contact the Minitrack Chair in
advance for electronic submission instructions.
So,  the  call  for  papers  genre  coordinates  activities  of
submitting  manuscripts  and  questions  and  answers  in
terms of media and its address.

One  of  the  form  features  of  a  genre  is  its  typical
medium, which allows for different means of moving the
information to the right place. For example, much of the
information  required  is  able  to  be  sent  electronically,
either  by  email  or  form  entry.    However,  at  the  HICSS
site,  one  cannot  input  data  via  a  web  page  on  the  hotel
registration form genre, which requires the participant to
print it out, write information by pen, and send it via fax.
If the genre is changed or elaborated to allow the use of
CGI (Common Gateway Interface) format, the elaborated
form  of  genre  can  coordinate  registration  processes
between participants and a hotel electronically. However,
though the hotel registration form genre as it exists retains
input  data  on  sender’s  side,  the  elaborated  online  form
genre itself cannot retain input data automatically, and the
sender needs additional processes for retaining his or her
registration  data.  In  order  to  confirm  the  data,  the  hotel
staff can use an email version of the notification genre.  A
genre system elaborated from the paper submission genre
system  could  include  a  genre  for  manuscript  submission
via  the  web  using  CGI,  also  elaborating  the  genre  by
which reviewers request papers to review to electronically
access  the  manuscript  database.  Looking  at  coordination
needs  to  manage  a  ‘fit’  dependency  using  electronic
genres will allow for there to be a check that ensures that
each  paper  is  reviewed  by  only  one  reviewer.  As  for
sequence,  the  electronic  database  could  also  track  status
as  each  reviewer  finishes  the  review.    The  mini–track
chair  could  see  all  the  review  results  and  each  reviewer
could see only his or her review result

Genres ensure that information is in the right place or

is able to be accessed appropriately.

5. Coordination model

In this  section  we  look  at  the  relationship  between  work
processes  and  the  genres  used  to  coordinate  information
flow,  fit  and  sharing  regarding  the  HICSS  conference.
This  analysis  yielded  some  insights  and  implications  for
further research.

We classified the genres elicited from the HICSS web
pages and the coordination aspects of the genres using a
Genre  Taxonomy  [22].  We  also  modeled  the  work
processes related to the genres. This Genre Taxonomy is a
section  of  the  Process  Handbook,  and  it  represents  the
elements  of  both  genres  and  genre  systems  in  terms  of
purpose,  contents,  participants,  timing  of  use,  place  of
communicative  action,  and 
including  media,
structuring  devices  and  linguistic  elements.  The  Genre
Taxonomy  includes  both  widely  recognized  genres  and
specific  genres,  and  the  genres  elicited  from  the  HICSS
web pages were added as specific genres. In this section,
we  illustrate  how  each  genre  elicited  in  the  33rd  HICSS
web pages is represented in the Genre Taxonomy and how
it related to other genres. Second, we illustrate how genre
coordination  shown  in  previous  section  is  represented  in
the Genre Taxonomy.  Then, we illustrate the relationship
between work processes related to HICSS conference and
genres as an example of the conference paper submission

form 

5.1.  Classification  of  genres  in  the  33rd  HICSS
web pages

In  order  to  represent  purposes  of  genres,  the  Genre
Taxonomy uses eight purpose categories such as ‘Inform,’
‘request,’ ‘decide,’ and ‘respond.’ A genre from a specific
case  study  such  as  a  genre  in  the  33rd  HICSS  genres  is
frequently a specialization of a widely recognized  genre.
For  an  example,  the  general  information  genre  is  a
specialization of the official announcement genre. Figure
4  shows  how  genres  in  the  33rd  HICSS  web  pages  are
categorized  in  the  purpose  categories.  Each  genre  in  the
33rd  HICSS  web  pages  is  a  specialization  of  a  widely
recognized genre such that the general information genre
is  a  specialization  of  the  official  announcement  genre.
Note that the call for papers genre is a  specialization  of
‘Inform’  and  ‘Request’  activities,  because  of  its  dual
purposes  to  inform  about  track  information  and  solicit
papers.

The advantage of this categorization is that a specific
specialization of a widely recognized genre will allow for
easy consideration of similar genres.

Figure  5  shows  the  type  of  information  the  Process
Handbook can show for the call for paper genre. As the
description  fields  can  include  links  to  web  pages,  the

Figure 4. Genres in the 33rd HICSS web pages in purpose categories of the Genre Taxonomy

genre system.

content is represented using this function.

Page 8

This activity is reserved to portray the genres of the 33rd HICSS web
pages. The entries here were prepared by Takeshi Yoshioka, a visiting
scientist from Fuji Xerox at CCS.

The call for papers genre is used primarily to
Inform/Track and mini-track information, important date information
and author instruction, and
Request/Solicit conference papers.

This genre coordinates information using web frame structure. For an
example, track-information is divided by a web page of each track.

See detail on the web pages of http://www.hicss.hawaii.edu/hicss_33/
overview.pdf, tutorials.htm, lecture.htm, plenary.htm, advise.htm
Figure  5.  The  description  of  the  call  for  papers
genre

5.2. Classification of genre coordination aspects

For representing genre coordination mechanisms, such
as  divisibility  of  information,  we  add  activities  named
‘Manage  information  using  genres,’  ‘Manage  time  using
genres,’  and  ‘Manage  place  using  genres,’  under  the
‘Coordinate  using  genres’  activity.  We  also  add
coordination  aspects  in  regards  to  information,  time  and
place as an activity under each coordination activity, such
that  ‘Manage 
information  divisibility  using  genres’
activity  is  under  ‘Manage  place  using  genre’  activity.
Figure 6 shows an excerpt of the specialization hierarchy
under the ‘Coordinate Information using genres’ activity.
 In  Figure  6,  we  show  three  types  of  coordination
mechanisms that address three aspects of information as a
resource:  divisibility,  concurrency  and  reusability.  For
example, there are two coordination mechanisms shown in
this figure that address information reusability: ‘Exchange
Info using multiple genres with same content & different
media’ (with an example of the ‘Communicate using webbased 
and paper-based brochure’ activity), and ‘Exchange
same Info by multiple web-base genre’ (with the ‘Inform
important  date.  on  multiple  genres  {HICSS}’  activity).
The multiple genres in this example are the call for papers
genre and the  general  information  genre  which  both  use
the same dates.

5.3. Relationship between HICSS work processes
and genres

the 

important  activities 

There  exists  a  strong  relationship  between  work
processes and communication, because communication is
one  of 
in  and  among
organizations.  As  genres  are  reflections  of  socially
recognized  rules,  norms  and  conventions,  enactment  of
genres is a key for effective communication. As illustrated
in  Section  4,  genres  can  provide  coordination  at  various
points  in  a  work  process.  In  this  subsection,  we  use  the
model of the relationship above to illustrate how it can be
used  for  innovation  of  new  coordination  mechanisms
using genres.

The  conference  paper  submission  genre  system
portrayed in Section 4 is a good example to illustrate the
relationship, because track and mini-track chairs, authors
and  the  conference  staff  must  coordinate  how  to  divide
information  about  track  and  mini-tracks,  timing  of  paper
due dates, and place of paper submission. In that section
we  showed  how  the  participants  could  use  coordination
theory  and  the  knowledge  repository  to  come  up  with
better approaches such as using an electronic database for
processing conference papers. Now we will show a model
of these approaches.

For modeling the relationship between work processes
and  genres,  we  use  dependency  graphs  in  the  Process
Handbook, which  represents  how  each  activity  relates  to
resources  using  dependencies  in  a  diagram  similar  to  a
resource flow diagram. Figure 7 is the dependency graph
of  the  conference  paper  submission  genre  system.  It
shows  the  sequence  of  the  genre  system,  which  includes
the  call  for  papers  genre,  the  author  instruction  genre,
paper  review  genre  system,  and  the  request  form  genre
with  work  processes  such  as  writing  a  paper  and
submitting  a  paper.  The  dependency  named  ‘Info  of
important  date’  is  shared  by  many  activities  such  as  the
‘Submit full paper’ activity, and the ‘Decide to Accept or
Reject Paper using Paper Review genre system {HICSS}’
activity  where  the  due  date  of  paper  reviewer  must  be

Figure 6.  Model of coordination mechanisms using genres

Page 9

information  widely.  In  other  words, 

before  the  notification  date  of  paper  acceptance.    As
illustrated  above,  when  a  dependency  graph  shows  that
many  activities  share  information  in  a  genre,  the  genre
coordinates 
if
coordination  for  sharing  information  is  designed  using
widely  recognized  communicative  actions,  it  becomes
easier  for  the  users  to  enact  the  work  processes  using
genres to coordinate certain communicative acts. In order
to  manage  widely  used  information,  senders  can  use  a
coordination mechanism that reuses information, as shown
in Figure 6. This might lead the chair to ask mini-chairs to
replicate and include the author instruction on each minitrack 
 guide.  Using  coordination  analysis  also  helps
identify  when  the  resource  input  into  an  activity  is  the
same as the output except for time and place. This might
lead  the  person  in  charge  of  the  design  of  the  work
processes  to  have  the  resource  directly  sent  to  multiple
activities  as  with  authors  submitting  directly  to  paper
reviewers as illustrated in Section 4.5.

6. Implications for research and practice

In  this  paper,  we  illustrated  how  genres  coordinate
information  and  the  aspects  of  genres  as  coordination
mechanisms. We turn now to some of the implications for
research and practices emerged from this study.

Web-based  genres  work  together  as  a  group.  It  is
useful  for  researchers  to  model  relationships  among
genres with work processes using a  dependency  diagram
(or resource flow graph) such as in the Process Handbook,
to make explicit the information flow among genres.

Since web-based genres can change contents and form
easily  due  to  characteristics  of  digital  document  and  the
Internet  media,  researchers  need 
to  observe  genre
chronological  changes  carefully.  In  our  example  above,
we  showed  how  changes  to  time  sensitive  information
could confuse the person submitting a paper.

One  of  the  coordination  mechanisms  to  reduce  the

chance  for  users  to  be  confused  is  to  segregate  the  time
sensitive data from static data and clearly identify when a
form or web page has changed.  For example, instead of
providing a connection to other media such as e-mail and
phone  communication,  allow  alternative  communication
methods on the web pages such as bulletin boards or chat
spaces. These allow for changing the appropriate contact
frequently and later in the process with least disruption.

When  users  face  collaborative  work  processes  in  and
across  organizations, 
there  are  many  and  various
communicative actions among work processes. The Genre
Taxonomy  has  a  benefit  in  allowing  users  to  improve
communication  methods  by  looking  at  the  roles  genres
play  for  coordinating  information,  review  the  various
examples and find similar cases of communicative actions.
Especially  in  the  case  of  intercultural  communications,
users may find it difficult to understand why they cannot
communicate well or coordinate work process. In order to
get ideas for improving their communication, we suggest
that  they  consider  a  repository  such  as  the  Genre
Taxonomy to find similar genres to their case. Web page
designers  and  system  designers  also  can  gain  benefits
from the Genre Taxonomy. In order for target users to be
able  to  communicate,  it  is  useful  to  model  their  existing
genres, understand social contexts around them, and then
apply them to the system. For example, when members of
a  community  communicate  formally  using  an  official
announcement  genre  and  there  is  a  strong  hierarchy,  the
designers might also consider introducing a chat system in
the community. The model could also provide a clue for
designers to understand what rules or norms work counter
to  the  genres  which  the  designers  wants  to  introduce
through comparison of successful cases and failure cases.
It is worth noting that though designers anticipate that the
target users enact the genres that the designers expect, the
target  users  might  enact  another  genre,  which  will
undercut or deny the chosen genre.

Figure 7.  The Dependency diagram of the Conference Paper Submission genre system

Page 10

7. Acknowledgment

We  would  like  to  thank  JoAnne  Yates  and  Wanda
Orlikowski  for  their  advice  on  this  paper,  and  to
acknowledge the research support of Fuji Xerox Co., Ltd.
and 
the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

for  Coordination  Science  at 

the  Center 

8. References

[1]  Bakhtin,  M.  M.  “Speech  Genres  and  Other  Late  Essays,”
(V.W.  McGee,  Trans.;  C  Emerson  and  M.  Holquist,  Eds.).
University of Texas Press, Austion, 1986.

[2] Bazerman, C. “Shaping Written Knowledge: The Genre and
Activity of the Experimental Article in Science,” The University
of Wisconsin Press, Madison WI, 1988.

[3]  Bazerman,  C.  "Systems  of  Genres  and  the  Enactment  of
Social  Intentions,"  In  A.  Freedman  A.  and  P.  Medway  (eds.),
Genre and the New Rhetoric. Taylor & Francis Ltd., pp. 79-101,
London, 1994.

[4]  Berkenkotter,  C.  and  Huckin,  T.  N.  “Genre  Knowledge  in
Disciplinary  Communication:  Cognition  /  Culture  /  Power,”
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, NJ, 1995.

[5] Brown, J. S, “Borderline Issues: Social and Material Aspects
of  Design,”  HUMAN-COMPUTER  INTERACTIONS,  9,  pp.  336,
 1994.

[6]  Brown,  J.  S,  and  Duguid,  P.  “The  Social  Life  of
Document,”  Release  1.0,  EDventure  Holdings  Inc.,  pp.  1-18,
New 
at
http://www.parc.xerox.com/ops/members/brown/papers/sociallif
e.html, 1995.

Available 

York, 

NY, 

[7] Crowston K. and Williams,  M.  "Reproduced  and  emergent
genres  of  communication  on 
the  World-Wide  Web,"  In
Proceedings of the 30th HICSS, (Hawaii: January), 1997.

[8]  Crowston  K.  and  Williams,  M.  "The  Effects  of  Linking  of
Web Documents," In Proceedings of the 32nd HICSS, (Hawaii:
January), 1999.

[9]  Erickson,  T.  "Making  Sense  of  Computer-Mediated
Communication (CMC): Conversation as Genres, CMC Systems
as  Genre  Ecologies,"  In  Proceedings  of  the  33rd  HICSS,
(Hawaii: January), 2000.

[10]  Erickson,  T.  "Rhyme  and  Punishment:  The  Creation  and
Enforcement  of  Conventions  in  an  On-Line  Participatory
Limerick  Genre,”  in  Proceedings  of  the  32nd  HICSS  (Hawaii,
January 1999), IEEE Press.

[11]  Malone,  T.W.  et  al.  “Tools  for  inventing  organizations:
Toward  a  handbook  of  organizational  process,”  Management
Science, 45, pp. 425-443, 1999.

Page 11

[12]  Malone,  T.W.  and  Crowston,  K.  “The  interdisciplinary
study of coordination,” ACM Computing Surveys, 16 (1), 1994.

[13] Miller, C. R. "Genre as Social Action," Quarterly Journal of
Speech, 70, pp. 151-167.

[14]  Orlikowski,  W.  J.  and  Yates,  J.  "Genre  Repertoire:
Examining  the  Structuring  of  Communicative  Practices  in
Organizations," Administrative Science Quarterly, 39, pp. 541574,
 1994.

[15]  Orlikowski,  W.  J.  and  Yates,  J.  “Genre  Systems  as
in
Communicative  Norms 
CCS 
Groupware,” 
at
http://ccs.mit.edu/papers/CCSWP205/, 1998.

for  Structuring 

Interaction 

Available 

WP205, 

[16]  Osborn,  C.  S.  "Documents  and  Dependencies:  Enabling
Strategic  Improvement  through  Coordination  Redesign"  in
Wakayama, T. et al. (ed.) Information and Process Integration
in  Enterprises:  Rethinking  Documents,  pp.  3154 
 Kluer
Academic Publishers, MA 1996.

[17] Shepherd, M. and Watters, C. “The Functionality Attribute
of  Cybergenres,"  in  Proceedings  of  the  32nd  HICSS,  (Hawaii:
January), 1999.

[18]  Yates,  S.  J.  and  Sammar,  T.  R.  "Digital  Genres  and  the
New  Burden  of  Fixity,"  in  Proceedings  of  the  30th  HICSS,
(Hawaii: January), 1997.

[19] Yates, J. and Orlikowski, W. J. “Genres of Organizational
Communication:  A  Structurational  Approach 
to  Studying
Communication and Media,” Academy of Management Review,
17, pp. 299-326, 1992.

[20]  Yates,  J.,  Orlikowski,  W.  J.  and  Rennecker,  J.
"Collaborative  Genres  for  Collaboration:  Genre  Systems  in
Digital Media," in Proceedings of the 30th Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences, (Hawaii: January), 1997.

[21]  Yates,  J.  and  Orlikowski,  W.  J.  "Genre  Systems:  Chronos
and  Kairos  in  Communicative  Interaction,"  Unpublished  paper
presented  at  the  Second  International  Symposium  on  Genre
(Vancouver, Canada: December), 1997.

[22]  Yoshioka,  T.  and  Herman,  G.  “Genre  Taxonomy:  A
Knowledge  Repository  of  Communicative  Action,“  CCS
WP209, Available at http://ccs.mit.edu/wp209.pdf, 1999.

[23] 
http://www.hicss.hawaii.edu/hicss_33/apahome3.htm

HICSS 

page, 

web 

33 

Available 

at

[24]  Internet  Software  Consortium  “Internet  Domain  Survey,”
Available at http:/ww.isc.org/ds, 2000

[25]  The  MIT  Process  Handbook  Project,  Available  at:
http://ccs.mit.edu/ph

[26]  MIT  Center  for  Coordination  Science  home  page,
Available at: http://ccs.mit.edu

