Electronic Jury Voting Protocols

Alejandro Hevia1(cid:1) and Marcos Kiwi2(cid:1)(cid:1)

1 Dept. of Computer Science & Engineering, U. of California, San Diego, CA, and

Dept. Cs. de la Computaci´on, U. Chile,

ahevia@cs.ucsd.edu

2 Dept. Ing. Matem´atica, U. Chile & Ctr. de Modelamiento Matem´atico, UMR 2071

U. Chile–CNRS, Santiago 170-3, Chile,

mkiwi@dim.uchile.cl

Abstract. This work elicits the fact that all current proposals for electronic 
voting schemes disclose the ﬁnal tally of the votes. In certain situations,
 like jury voting, this may be undesirable. We present a robust and
universally veriﬁable Membership Testing Scheme (MTS) that allows,
among other things, a collection of voters to cast votes and determine
whether their tally belongs to some pre–speciﬁed small set (e.g., exceeds
a given threshold) — our scheme discloses no additional information
than that implied from the knowledge of such membership. We discuss
several extensions of our basic MTS. All the constructions presented combine 
features of two parallel lines of research concerning electronic voting
schemes, those based on MIX–networks and in homomorphic encryption.

1 Introduction

In a typical trial by jury in the United States, twelve jurors deliberate in private.
A foreman appointed by the judge among the jurors presides the deliberations.
Jurors might be called upon to decide on several diﬀerent counts according to
a policy which may be complicated. Nevertheless, the simplest and most important 
jury verdicts are of the binary type, e.g., innocent/guilty. In criminal
cases unanimity is required in order to reach a verdict. In civil cases there are
diﬀerent standards, nine out of twelve votes are representative numbers. Jury
deliberations proceed in discussion rounds followed by voting rounds. Voting is
performed by raising hands. Hence, a typical requirement of an election protocol,
privacy of the votes, is not achieved. This opens the possibility of biases on decisions 
due to jurors fear of rejection, a posteriori reprisals by interested parties,
and/or follow-the-leader kind of behavior. In fact, just knowledge of tallies can
cause undesirable follow-the-pack type conducts among jurors.

A ballot box system could be implemented in order to guarantee privacy. A
subset of the jury might be held responsible for tallying the votes and communicating 
to the others whether a verdict has been reached. Still, this discloses the
(cid:1) Partially supported by Conicyt via Fondap in Applied Mathematics 1999–2000, and

Fondecyt No. 1981182, and by NSF CCR-0093029.

(cid:1)(cid:1) Gratefully acknowledges the support of Conicyt via Fondecyt No. 1981182 and Fondap 
in Applied Mathematics 1999–2000.

S. Rajsbaum (Ed.): LATIN 2002, LNCS 2286, pp. 415–429, 2002.
c(cid:1) Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2002

416

Alejandro Hevia and Marcos Kiwi

ﬁnal tally to a subset of the jury and allows them to manipulate the deliberation
process. An outside third party (e.g., a judge, government employee, etc.) could
be responsible for tallying the votes, but this would cast doubts on the whole
process since it allows for outside jury manipulation, could cause undesirable
leaks on how the jury is leaning, etc.

We provide an electronic drop in procedure for jury voting in the presence
of a curious media, interested parties, dishonest court employees, and conﬂictive
jury members, that reveals nothing besides whether the ﬁnal tally exceeds or
not a given threshold value. We stress that we do not question the adequacy of
the way in which juries deliberate. There are good reasons to encourage jurors
to express clearly and openly their opinions. The point is that the way in which
juries deliberate is just one familiar example, among many, where it is clear that
the voting procedure itself has an eﬀect on the ﬁnal outcome. In particular, our
work is motivated by the observation that voting procedures that disclose ﬁnal
tallies may be undesirable. This situation occurs whenever small groups wish to
make a yes/no type decision by majority vote, e.g., whether to accept or reject
a paper submitted to a cryptology conference — the cryptographers program
committee problem, to conﬁrm or not someone as president of a committee or
chair of a department, whether or not to send an invitation to a speaker, to
decide whether to go forth with a given investment.

Our main procedure also provides a novel solution for the problem of computing 
partial information from private data, which includes among others, the
’scoring’ problem. In the latter, a person is willing to answer some very sensitive
questions to a group of evaluators (say for a job interview or insurance appli-
cation). Answers are coded as integer values and might be weighted diﬀerently
depending on the question. Evaluators would like to learn whether the weighted
score of the answers T exceeds a given threshold or belongs to a set S of “sat-
isfactory” values. The respondent wishes to keep private the answers to each
individual question. A solution satisfying both requirements can be obtained by
using a threshold voting scheme. Here, answers to diﬀerent questions are seen as
votes coming from diﬀerent individuals. The (weighted) sum T of these “votes”is
tested for membership in the set S of “satisfactory” values. This work’s main
scheme provides a solution to these problem and guarantees that only one bit of
information is released: whether the “tally” T belongs or not to the given set S.
The ﬁrst electronic voting scheme proposals focused on breaking the correspondence 
between the voters and the vote casted. Afterward, several other desirable 
properties of electronic voting schemes (besides correctness, privacy, and
eﬃciency) were identiﬁed, e.g., robustness, availability, non–duplication, universal 
veriﬁability, non–coercibility. Electronic voting protocols satisfying diﬀerent
subsets of the latter properties were designed. Nevertheless, all of them reveal the
ﬁnal vote tally. In this work we propose a cryptographic procedure for addressing
this problem and stress its relevance by describing other applications.

