Understanding Real-World Events via Multimedia

Summaries Based on Social Indicators

Mauricio Quezada and Barbara Poblete

PRISMA Research Group

Department of Computer Science, University of Chile, Chile

{mquezada,bpoblete}@dcc.uchile.cl

Abstract. We present a novel methodology for creating multimedia summaries
of real-world events through social media information. Summaries are generated
using selected multimedia data disseminated through Twitter. The proposed summarization 
technique takes into account social indicators of relevance, which are
used to select a set of representative multimedia objects for summarizing the
event from a social perspective. In addition, our approach incorporates different
news angles by extracting topics within each event.

Keywords: Social Networks, Collaborative Summaries, Multimedia.

1 Introduction

The Web and in particular social networks are characterized for generating and publishing 
huge amounts of information on a daily basis. In particular, important real-world
events (such as recent Boston bombing attacks, for example) overﬂow social media
platforms with millions of messages. Moreover, many of these user-generated messages 
not only include textual data, but also hyperlinks to external media documents,
images, and videos. It is understandable that under this type of scenario the volume of
data becomes overwhelming for any human to analyze. Therefore, users searching for
fresh information about news events must settle with just browsing a few messages or
waiting for traditional news sources to report the information.

One of the most challenging social media platforms in terms of data volume and user
adoption, is Twitter1. With over 400 million messages (tweets) posted every day2, its
users regularly use Twitter to share all sorts of multimedia. Mostly, multimedia content
embedded (as hyperlinks) in tweets consists of text documents (on-line news articles,
blog posts, Web pages), photographs (from services like Instagram3, Flickr4), videos
(from YouTube5, Vimeo6), or even audio (SoundCloud7 for instance). Depending on

1 http://www.twitter.com/
2 https://blog.twitter.com/2013/celebrating-twitter7
3 http://www.instagr.am/
4 http://www.flickr.com/
5 http://www.youtube.com/
6 http://www.vimeo.com/
7 http://www.soundcloud.com/

P. Antunes et al. (Eds.): CRIWG 2013, LNCS 8224, pp. 18–25, 2013.
c(cid:2) Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013

Multimedia Summaries Using Social Indicators

19

the nature of the real-world event, the most signiﬁcant data can be in the form of text,
images or video.

To address the multimedia data deluge on the Web, and in particular that of online 
social media, we propose a methodology for automatically summarizing events.
This reduces the load on the user for the task of understanding events. Our approach is
based on the incorporation of multimedia data into our summaries as well as text. To
achieve this we propose a social based selection scheme for multimedia objects (such
as video, images, documents and tweets themselves) that compose the information of
an event. The main advantage of our method is the use of social information extracted
from Twitter, as a key factor of multimedia document importance. This is, for any event
disseminated through the social network, we consider as its most important elements
those that have generated the most interest from users (e.g., shares and/or replies). Then,
using this selected media we build a comprehensive summary of the event.

Our approach is unique, in the sense that unlike other automatic summarization techniques,
 we do not create textual excerpts from existing documents. Instead, we create
our summary as a composition of the most representative elements of each subtopic of
the event from a social perspective. This allows us to generate summaries regardless of
the type of the element in the summary, facilitating multimodal element combination.
By taking advantage of all of the information people post in the social Web, we see
this approach as a form of implicit collaboration. Since every message conforms the
description of an event, summarizing this information helps in understanding particular
aspects of it. For example, this type of approach can help journalistic inquiry or the
evaluation of sociological hypotheses.

In this article we present our system prototype, which uses Last.fm8 and Google
News9 as event aggregators for concerts and world news, respectively. For each of the
identiﬁed events our system gathers related social media information using Twitter. We
further expand this dataset by including all of the multimedia elements embedded in
each tweet. We model each of these multimodal Web elements using a vector representation.
 This representation is generated aggregating the text from the tweets that
reference the multimedia object, identiﬁed by its URL. In addition, we clusterize these
elements, to identify subtopics within the event. Then, from each subtopic we extract
the most important documents according to social information. Even though this is a
ﬁrst implementation of our approach, our use cases show that it can be a very effective 
and useful summarization technique. We show promising preliminary results from
manually inspected case studies that support the soundness of our approach.

This paper is organized as follows: in Section 2 we present relevant related work; in
Section 3 we give an overview of our prototype system and methodology; in Section 4 we
show some preliminary results, and in Section 5 we discuss conclusions and future work.

2 Related Work

Relevant literature for our research topic can be classiﬁed as follows: automatic generation 
of summaries based on real-world events and social data, content selection for
event representations and measuring relevance from social messages.

8 http://last.fm
9 http://news.google.com

20

M. Quezada and B. Poblete

There are several works on the topic of content summarization using social information,
 being that of Chakrabarti and Punera [8] one of the most representatives. In
this work the authors summarize sport events based on the frequency of tweets in certain 
periods of time, whose duration is determined automatically. They then summarize
each time window using a similarity approach. Summaries are created based on textual
information in tweets, from which they select those with higher scores.

By using multimedia data, Del Fabro and B¨osz¨ormenyi [2,3] generate image and
video summaries from well-known events, such as a royal wedding. The relevance of
each video is measured by its popularity on the social video platform YouTube. These
summaries are only generated for selected events and do not consider other types of
information (just videos). Another approach is that of Sinha and Jain [4], in which they
make summaries from personal photography collections. They use content-based image
features to create clusters from which they produce the summary.

Our contribution in this area is that of creating summaries by aggregating information
from social networks using data mining techniques. Our summaries are composed of
multimodal data, which includes video, audio, images, documents and in some cases
social media messages. Our work is related to that of Becker et al. [5,6], in the sense
that multimedia information is used for summarization. But it differs in the fact that we
base our event representation solely on social data, as well as element relevance. We
select social features for event representation using the work of Castillo et al. [7] and
Duan et al. [9].

3 Methodology Overview

We propose a methodology for generating real-world event summaries using a uniﬁed
representation of multimodal documents and their social relevance. The relevance of
each document is measured using social indicators that mined from on-line social networks.
 This is, the more shared or commented document is, the more relevant it is
considered compared to the rest. The methodology involves several stages, from data
extraction for each event, to generating a summary by gathering the most relevant documents 
from each subtopic of an event representation. In detail, the steps that compose
our methodology are the following (shown in Fig. 1):

1. Event metadata extraction from event aggregators, like news or music events
2. For each event: Document extraction by searching on-line social media sources

using the event metadata

3. Event modeling phase, i.e., for each event, aggregate and adapt the data for a proper

representation.

4. Event subtopic identiﬁcation (for each event)
5. Event multimodal summary creation, selecting the most relevant documents from

each subtopic.

Event Metadata Extraction
In order to obtain descriptive event metadata, we use event aggregators. These aggregators 
usually have a list of events and their descriptions such as, a title, start and end date
of the event, and a short list of keywords or a short description of the event.

Multimedia Summaries Using Social Indicators

21

Event

aggregators

Search by keywords

Document
extraction

Social media

sources

e1

e2

.
.
.

en

d1

d2

.
.
.

dm

Subtopics
Identiﬁcation

top-k
retrieval

(cid:2)
1

d

.
.
.
(cid:2)
d
k

.
.
.
(cid:2)
m

d

Fig. 1. Methodology overview. The steps of the methodology consist in an event extraction phase,
social media search for each event, then subtopic identiﬁcation and ﬁnally the selection of the
top-k most relevant documents from each subtopic.

For our initial implementation we only considered two types of events: music concerts 
and world news. For music events (concerts and festivals) we used the Last.fm
API for geolocated events in London, Glastonbury, Las Vegas, Stockholm and Santiago.
 For news event information in Chile and the US we used the Google News API.
Using these public APIs we extract relevant data, such as names of artists participating
in music events, and the related news titles. We use this data as keywords for each event
for the next phase.

Event Data Extraction and Representation Using Social Sources
In order to model multimodal documents that are part of a particular event we use only
social data. Therefore, for each event, we perform a social media platform (in this case
Twitter) search using the metadata extracted in the previous phase. This search is timesensitive,
 hence we search the time-frame in which the event occurs (start and end date
of the event).

Fig. 2. Example of a document representation. After resolving all shortened hyperlinks contained
in the messages, we group every tweet with the same resolved URL into a document, with that
URL as its identiﬁer. In this example we do not show the tf-idf scaling of the texts for clarity.

Once we obtain all the messages or tweets that discuss the event, we separate those
messages which contain hyperlinks from those that do not. Messages which do not include 
a hyperlink are added to our multimodal document collection, considering the
sole tweet text as the content of the document. On the other hand, if a message contains
a hyperlink, then this message is not added to our document representation. Instead, we
extract all of the hyperlinks mentioned in messages. Next, we resolve each URL, which
in many cases has been shortened, to ﬁnd duplicate links. Each of these unique hyperlinks 
may reference several multimodal documents, which can be textual documents,

22

M. Quezada and B. Poblete

Web pages, images, videos, etc. We add each of these hyperlinks, identiﬁed by their
URL and use the aggregation all of the tweets which mention this URL as surrogate
textual content for the document. Therefore, our implementation does not require that
we download or process the actual contents of the multimodal document referenced by
the URL. Instead, we use the aggregated short messages that mention the URL as text
content for the document. This way, we tackle the issue of processing very short and
noisy text messages, like tweets. Figure 2 shows an example of the previously described
document representation.

Next, after all of the documents of an event are added to the event collection we apply 
standard tf-idf scaling to their vector-model representation (see [1]).

Subtopic Identiﬁcation
Once we have the set of multimedia document vectors that compose an event in our
system, the next step is to identify subtopics. As a ﬁrst approach, we use the K-means
clustering algorithm for this purpose.

K-means requires as an input the number of desired subtopics. As this is not simple
to estimate, we approximate this by using the number of related news items and the
number of artists, for news and concert events, respectively. It should be noted that it
is possible to improve the subtopic estimation of cluster numbers by running K-means
multiple times with different number of clusters. This parameter was determined empirically 
for in the use cases we describe in the following section.

Selection of Relevant Documents
The ﬁnal step is the selection of the most relevant documents for each event subtopic.
In this initial implementation we select the top-2 or top-3 documents of each subtopic.
To select the documents, we use a simple method approach consisting of determining
relevance by weighting several social features. As a ﬁrst approximation we use the
number of retweets, the number of times the tweets was marked as favorite, the number
of followers/followees of the author, the number of lists that the author belongs to. This
weighting scheme was built following the conclusions of Duang et al. [9] work, and
most of the indicators detailed in the work of Castillo et al. [7].

Therefore, the summary of each event was created by using the top-2 or top-3 elements 
of each event subtopic, for the purpose of generating a succint summary of each
event.

4 Case Studies

In order to assess the soundness of our methodology we inspected two different types
of events:

1. Police arrest suspects in Tel Aviv (News, 250 hyperlinks, 743

tweets)

2. New York Philharmonic Dvorak’s New World Symphony (Music

concert, 150 hyperlinks, 279 tweets)

Multimedia Summaries Using Social Indicators

23

We obtain preliminary results for each event, ﬁrst by determining empirically the
appropriate number of clusters. For this we used the inter-cluster and intra-cluster ratio
measures.

Fig. 3. Evaluation of the clustering solution for the event “Police arrest suspects in Tel Aviv”.
ISim represents intra-cluster measure and ESim the inter-cluster one. It can be seen that there is a
local maximum at 9 clusters.

For our implementation we used Cluto (see [10]) to generate a clustering solution
with a ﬁxed number of clusters. This program returns a measure of the intra-cluster
and inter-cluster evaluation of the clustering. The inter-cluster indicates how similar the
elements are of one cluster to the elements of the remainder of them. The intra-cluster
indicates how similar the elements of one cluster are to every other element in the same
cluster. We divided the intra-cluster measure by the inter-cluster one, by considering
that the higher the ratio, the better the clustering.

The Fig. 3 shows the ratio against various clustering runs for the Tel Aviv event. It
can be seen that 9 is a proper number of clusters because the Intra-Inter cluster similarity 
ratio is a local maximum. Figure 4 shows the most relevant documents according to
a methodology applied to this event. The summary is mostly composed of Web documents 
and twitter status messages. The following links constitute the identiﬁers of the
summary documents of the event:

1. Arrest announced in Tel Aviv bus bombing — National News - WDSU Home10
2. Shin Bet, police arrest suspects in TA bus bombing — JPost — Israel News11
3. Tel Aviv Bombing Suspects Arrested - The Daily Beast12
4. Twitter / panosharitos: Tel Aviv police chasing after ...13

10 http://www.wdsu.com/news/national/Arrest-announced-in-Tel
-Aviv-bus-bombing/-/9853500/17524408/-/m562vn/-/index.html

11 http://www.jpost.com/Defense/Article.aspx?ID=293140&R=R1
12 http://www.thedailybeast.com/cheats/2012/11/22/

tel-aviv-bombing-suspects-arrested.html

13 https://twitter.com/panosharitos/status/271204357654077441

24

M. Quezada and B. Poblete

5. Twitter / 1stNewsHeds: New York (NY) Times: Police ...14
6. Twitter / MARKETRISER: Israel arrests suspects in ...15
7. Previous bomb attacks in Tel Aviv - Yahoo! News16
8. Twitter / BreakingNews: Israel’s army spokesman says ...17
9. Arrest announced in Tel Aviv bus bombing - CNN.com18

Fig. 4. Twitter message with the highest score in the “Police arrest suspects in Tel Aviv” event
summary. (Source: Twitter)

For the “New York Philharmonic Dvorak’s New World Symphony” event, most of
the summary documents are non-textual elements (multimedia). These elements are
referenced from Instagram, Twitter (with an embedded photo) or YouTube, as can be
seen in Fig. 5.

Fig. 5. Some of the resulting documents from the “New York Philharmonic Dvorak’s New World
Symphony” summary. (Sources: Instagram, Twitter and YouTube, from left to right)

14 https://twitter.com/1stNewsHeds/status/271752495401934849
15 https://twitter.com/MARKETRISER/status/271758949043298304
16 http://news.yahoo.com/

previous-bomb-attacks-tel-aviv-153452046.html

17 https://twitter.com/BreakingNews/status/271718080856592384
18 http://edition.cnn.com/2012/11/22/world/

meast/israel-bus-bombing-arrests/index.html

Multimedia Summaries Using Social Indicators

25

5 Conclusions and Future Work

We presented a novel methodology for generating automatic summaries from multimedia 
real-world event information. The main contribution of our work is to exploit social
information from Twitter to summarize in a simple way events which are extremely
rich in information. In addition, by using social information we are able to combine
and select multimodal elements for our summaries. Overall, our preliminary inspection
of results shown by this approach are very promising and the resulting summaries give
comprehensive descriptions of the events. As part of future work we expect to improve
subtopic identiﬁcation algorithms and document selection and ranking. In addition, as
this is a work in progress, we are working on a large scale evaluation which will compare 
with alternative approaches and incorporate other types of events.

Acknowledgements. Mauricio Quezada was supported by CONICYT grant CONICYT-
PCHA/Magister Nacional/2013 - 22131151 and FONDECYT grant 11121511.

Barbara Poblete was partially supported by FONDECYT grant 11121511 and Program 
U-INICIA VID 2012, grant U-INICIA 3/0612; University of Chile.

References

1. Salton, G., Wong, A., Yang, C.-S.: A vector space model for automatic indexing. Communications 
of the ACM 18(11), 613–620 (1975)

2. Del Fabro, M., Sobe, A., B¨osz¨ormenyi, L.: Summarization of real-life events based on
community-contributed content. In: The Fourth International Conferences on Advances in
Multimedia, MMEDIA 2012 (April 2012)

3. Del Fabro, M., B¨osz¨ormenyi, L.: Summarization and presentation of real-life events using
community-contributed content. In: Schoeffmann, K., Merialdo, B., Hauptmann, A.G., Ngo,
C.-W., Andreopoulos, Y., Breiteneder, C. (eds.) MMM 2012. LNCS, vol. 7131, pp. 630–632.
Springer, Heidelberg (2012)

4. Sinha, P., Mehrotra, S., Jain, R.: Summarization of personal photologs using multidimensional 
content and context. In: Proceedings of the 1st ACM International Conference on
Multimedia Retrieval (April 2011)

5. Becker, H., Iter, D., Naaman, M., Gravano, L.: Identifying content for planned events across
social media sites. In: Proceedings of the Fifth ACM International Conference on Web Search
and Data Mining (February 2012)

6. Becker, H., Naaman, M., Gravano, L.: Learning similarity metrics for event identiﬁcation in
social media. In: Proceedings of the Third ACM International Conference on Web Search
and Data Mining (February 2010)

7. Castillo, C., Mendoza, M., Poblete, B.: Information credibility on twitter. In: Proceedings of

the 20th International Conference on World Wide Web (March 2011)

8. Chakrabarti, D., Punera, K.: Event summarization using tweets. In: Proceedings of the Fifth

International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media (May 2011)

9. Duan, Y., Jiang, L., Qin, T., Zhou, M., Shum, H.Y.: An empirical study on learning to rank of
tweets. In: Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Computational Linguistics.
Association for Computational Linguistics (August 2010)

10. Karypis, G.: CLUTO-a clustering toolkit (No. TR-02-017). Dept. of Computer Science. University 
of Minnesota (2002), http://www.cs.umn.edu/˜cluto

