New Metrics for Newsblog Credibility 

 

Brian Ulicny 

bulicny@vistology.com 

Ken Baclawski 

ken@baclawski.com 

VIStology, Inc., 5 Mountainview Drive, Framingham, MA 01701 USA 

 
 
Abstract 
The blogosphere is an invaluable source of insight into attitudes 
towards significant world and local events.  Traditional measures 
of  topical  relevance,  timeliness,  specificity  and  credibility  are 
inadequate  when  it  comes  to  blogs, however, due to their short 
length,  high  degree  of  quotation,  exophoricity,  and    the    short  
life  cycle  of  blog  postings.   In this  paper, we motivate a novel 
metric for blog credibility that is one of the metrics underlying a 
blog search and analytics engine we are constructing.    

Keywords 
Blog mining, blog search, credibility, authority, influence. 

1.  Introduction 
Is  the  standard  model  of  information  quality  satisfactory  as 
applied  to  blogs  about  the  news  stream?    In  the  following,  we 
argue  that  it  is  not  and  motivate  an  alternative  metric  for  blog 
post credibility that we are currently prototyping in a blog search 
and analytics engine for news blogs on foreign relations (see [11] 
for details).  

The  sort  of  blog  postings  we  are  interested  in  -- call  
them newsblogs  --  are  mainly  commentaries  on  news  stories.  
They  largely  consist  of  blog  posts  featuring  hyperlinks  to, 
references to or explicit quotations from traditional news sources, 
such  as  newspapers  and  news  broadcasts.    Many  news  events 
light  up  a  large  portion  of  the  blogosphere  (e.g.  [1])  without 
being  really  consequential.    How  can  we  incorporate  the 
credibility of commentators into an assessment of the importance 
of a news event in addition to its popularity? 

independent  assessments  of  a  source(cid:146)s 

Credibility is difficult to measure objectively.    Someone is 
credible if we judge them to be disposed to tell the truth [10] or 
present sound arguments on a topic.  Credibility is distinct from 
reliability: we make judgments of credibility even when we don(cid:146)t 
have 
reliability.  
Independent assessments of the accuracy or reliability of a source 
can  inform  one(cid:146)s  credibility  judgments,  of course. On the other 
hand,  lacking  credibility  doesn(cid:146)t  mean  that  a  source    doesn(cid:146)t  
speak  the  truth:  it just means  that the source is not likely to be 
believed or be found persuasive. .  

Currently,  the  most  popular  information  retrieval    (IR) 
models, beginning with Google(cid:146)s PageRank [2] and  Kleinberg.s  
HITS  [7]    algorithms,    rank    document  relevance  to  a  query 
quantitatively  in  terms  of  query  term frequency  and  position  
and    qualitatively  via    a  recursive  metric  of  the  quality  of  
incoming  (and  outgoing,  in  Kleinberg)  links.    It would be 

ICWSM(cid:146)2007 Boulder,Colorado,USA 

natural to take high-quality blog posts to be credible.  However, 
retrieval,  clustering    and    indexing    techniques  that  work  on  
ordinary    web  documents  don(cid:146)t    work  well  in  the  blogosphere,   
because blog postings are short, of ephemeral importance, highly 
exophoric,  highly  quotational,    and  much  less    susceptible    to  
PageRank/Kleinberg    type analysis because they have relatively 
few incoming links, especially on a per-author basis. 
2.  Credibility vs. authority 
The Technorati1 blog search engine calculates a measure of blog 
authority as  (the  log  of)  the  number  of  incoming  blog links 
over a six month period [9].  Authority would seem to be closely 
related to the notion of credibility.  Is inlink quantity therefore a 
good correlate for credibility? 

Blog  credibility  metrics  that  consider  only  aspects  of  the 
reception  of  a  message  (here,  inlink  counts)  are  obviously  onesided.
  Reception-only metrics consider a blog with  no  inlinks 
to    have    no  credibility.  Blogs, like other messages, however, 
have  a  source,  content  and  receiver(s),  and  all  three  can 
contribute to a  blog(cid:146)s  credibility [4]. 

One problem with considering only the  reception of  a  blog  
in credibility  attributions  is  that  it  tends  to  unfairly reward  
blog longevity. As Sifry notes [8], high inlinking correlates  with  
blog  age  and post volume.  Therefore, new bloggers will usually 
tend to have less credibility, measured in this way.  Sifry is right 
to  say  that  inlink  counts  are  perhaps  a  better  measure  of  blog 
influence,  a  notion  that  is  essentially  descriptive  rather  than 
normative. 

Are credible bloggers always influential?  As an experiment, 
we  looked  at  the  list  of  bloggers  labeled  Political  Science 
Weblogs on the popular academic political theory link aggregator 
Political Theory Daily  Review2.  This  list  of  political  scientist 
bloggers  ranges  across    the    ideological    spectrum.    It  hasn(cid:146)t  
been  updated  in a year, but  25  of  the  27  bloggers  he lists 
have active blogs.   These bloggers have collectively  published  
at    least    62    books    and  approximately  650  peer-reviewed 
articles.  There are 18 tenured faculty members and 21  PhDs. 

The median blogger in this list has links from only 23 blogs 
in the last 6 months, so it only counts as having middle authority.  
Thus, having  demonstrable  credibility  by  external  measures  
is  no guarantee of inlinking popularity or authority.  Further, it 
is  unclear  that  one  tenured  political  science  professor  is  up  to 
                                                               
1 http://www.technorati.com 
2 http://www.politicaltheory.info/weblogs.htm 

times  more  credible 

than  another  just  because  one 
four 
professor(cid:146)s  blog  attracts  a  few  hundred  more  links  than    the 
other(cid:146)s.     
3.  Measuring credibility  
We are constructing a measure of blog credibility that takes into 
account source, message and reception features of bloggers.  We 
also  consider  it  crucial  to  measure  credibility  by  author,  rather 
than  by  blog,  because  in  a  multi-author  blog,  an  author  can 
derive  credibility  he  or  she  hasn(cid:146)t    earned    (e.g.  see  [11]). 
Currently, we have identified a set of  48  source, message and 
reception  features  that  we  are  using  to  formulate  a  measure  of 
blog  author  credibility.      As  with  Google(cid:146)s  news  ranking 
algorithm  [3],  we  rely  on  source  and  message  features  when 
inlinks are rare.  Kaid and Postelnicu [6] have also demonstrated 
that  both  message  features  and  source  features  factor  into 
credibility assessments.   

In  evaluating  a  preliminary  version  of  this  metric,  three  
colleagues provided  a  partial  ranking  of  ten  blogs  in  terms  
of  credibility  selected  by  querying  on  the  topic  [Taliban].      A 
credibility measure was computed using the unweighted presence 
or absence of the 48  factors mentioned.   Human rankings had 
an average pairwise Kendall tau rank correlation of 0.51 (where 
1.0  indicates    perfect    correlation    and  -1.0    indicates    perfect 
uncorrelation).   The  average pairwise Kendall tau correlation of 
humans    with    the    assigned    credibility    metric    ranking  was  
0.45.    When  compared  with    the    rankings    determined    by  
Technorati  inlink    counts,  the    average  pairwise  Kenall    tau 
correlation  with  human  rankings  was  only  0.30.     This was 
an  encouraging    result;    it    suggests  that  human  credibility 
judgments are  correlated  with  features  in  addition  to  inlink  
counts.   Further work is necessary to determine which features 
are most highly correlated with credibility.   By finding a set of 
bloggers  who  we  can  consider  credible  a  priori,  such  as  the 
tenured bloggers mentioned above, we can identify features that 
distinguish their blogs from ordinary blogs.   

Along  these  lines,  in  a  study  of  twenty  blog  posts  from 
PoliticalTheory.info  bloggers  with  academic  tenure and a set of 
twenty random blog posts retrieved on [Taliban], it is clear that 
there  are  some  features  that  distinguish  credible  bloggers  from 
average bloggers (Table 1: see first five rows, italicized).  Most 
textual  features  we  examined  (number  of  sentences,  number  of 
proper  names,  reading  level)  were  fairly  similar  on  average 
between  the  tenured  bloggers  and  average  bloggers,  so  writing 
style  alone  doesn(cid:146)t  distinguish  credible  bloggers.  However,  a 
number of features did stand out as being significant, such as use 
of  full  names  and  affiliation,  presence  of  comments,  and 
hyperlink  citations.    We  hope  to  use  these  factors  to  tune  our 
credibility metric further  

Acknowledgements 
This material is based upon work supported by the United States 
Air Force under Contract No. FA9550-06-C-0023.  This material 
expresses  the  views  and  conclusions  of  the  authors  alone  and 
does  not  necessarily  reflect  the  views  of  the  United  States  Air 
Force. 

 

 

Tenured Bloggers  Average Bloggers 

Full Names 
Affiliation 

Unquoted Content 

Links to News 

Sources 

Has 1+ Comments 
Avg  # Sentences 
Avg # Paragraphs 
Avg Unique PNs 
Avg. Readability3 

100% 
100% 
100% 

90% 

60% 
21.8 
9.9 
18.3 
15.1 

30% 
10% 
75% 

45% 

30% 
29 
10.4 
16.7 
13.6 

Table 1:  Some distinguishing features of tenured bloggers 

 
References 
[1]  Boing Boing. 2007.  (cid:147)Jilted, diapered astronaut planned to 

kidnap rival(cid:148).  

[2]  Brin, S. L Page, R. Motwami , T. Winograd. 1999.  The 
PageRank citation ranking: Bringing order to the Web.  
Stanford University Technical Report 1999-0120. 

[3]  Curtiss, M, K. Bharat, M. Schmitt. 2005. Systems and 

methods for improving the ranking of news articles.  US 
Patent Application 20050060312 

[4]  Danielson, D.R., (cid:147)Web Credibility(cid:148), in Encyclopedia of 
Human-Computer Interaction. Claude Ghaoai, ed. Idea 
Group. Hershey, PA. 2006. 

[5]  Donath. J.  2000.  Being Real. In K. Goldberg (ed.) The 

Robot in the Garden: Telerobotics and Telepistemology in 
the Age of the Internet.  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 

[6]  Kaid, L.L, M. Postelnicu. 2007.  Credibility of Political 

Messages on the Internet: A Comparison of Blog Sources.  
In M. Tremayne (ed.), Blogging, Citizenship, and the Future 
of Media. Routledge: New York. 

[7]  Kleinberg, J. 1999.  Authoritative sources in a hyperlinked 

environment.  Journal of the ACM, 46, 1999. 

[8]  Sifry, D. 2006. Blogging Characteristics by Technorati 
Authority. http://www.sifry.com/alerts/Slide0006-8.gif 

[9]  Sifry, S.  State of the Blogosphere.  2006.  

http://www.technorati.com/weblog/2006/11/161.html 

[10] Thagard, P. 2005. (cid:147)Testimony, Credibility and Explanatory 

Coherence(cid:148).  Erkenntnis (2005) 63:295(cid:150)316  

[11] Ulicny, B., K. Baclawski, A. Magnus. 2007.  New Metrics 
for Blog Mining.   Proceedings of SPIE Defense & Security 
Symposium (cid:146)07 Vol. #6570.  Orlando, FL. 

                                                               
3 Gunning fog index 

