Modern Slavery Act Transparency Statement

June 2017

This statement is made on behalf of Emerald Group Holdings Limited (Emerald Group) and its affiliated undertakings pursuant to section 
54(1) of the Modern Slavery Act 2015 (MSA). 

Emerald Group is a global publisher linking research and practice to the benefit of society. Founded in 1967, Emerald Group today manages 
a range of digital products, a portfolio of nearly 300 journals, more than 2,500 books and over 450 teaching cases. Details of the territories 
in which we do business are available on our website.

This is the first statement prepared by us in relation to the MSA and relates to actions and activities during the financial year 1 January 2016 
to 31 December 2016. In future years we aim to develop our work in this area. 

Commitment 
We are committed to ensuring that there is no slavery, servitude, forced or compulsory human labour, abuse of power over vulnerable 
individuals, human trafficking or any other form of exploitation as contemplated by the MSA (Modern Slavery) in any part of our business or 
in our supply chain. 

We welcome the transparency encouraged by the MSA and this statement sets out for the public, our clients, suppliers and employees, the 
steps that we are taking in this regard. 

Our policies
At Emerald Group we strive for transparent business operations and performance. We adhere to a high set of ethics and values that guide 
our governance procedures and daily management decisions. 

To have a long term valuable impact on the social context of all its stakeholders, Emerald Group recognizes that it must be a profitable 
business operating above and beyond existing ethical and legal standards. 

As an organization, Emerald Group is committed to expanding its operations globally in a sustainable manner for the benefit of its customers, 
its employees, and the wider communities and environments on which it impacts. The business takes a pro-active approach to its corporate 
responsibility, which is deeply rooted in its corporate strategy and business decisions.

For example, at the point of recruitment, appropriate checks in accordance with relevant laws are carried out on prospective employees and 
our HR team works closely with the relevant teams in the local territories to make sure that pay and conditions are appropriately managed.

In accordance with our commitment to acting ethically and with integrity in all our business relationships, we intend to implement effective 
systems and controls to ensure Modern Slavery is not taking place in our supply chains. This will involve ensuring the effective communication 
and reinforcement of our relevant policies, which give a clear view of the values and principles that underpin all of our work and that we 
expect all persons involved in our business and supply chain to adhere to. These policies comprise our Anti-Slavery and Human Trafficking 
Policy (applicable and available to all of our agents, consultants, contractors, employees and temporary workers) and our Supplier Code of 
Conduct (applicable and available to all of our suppliers).

Supplier due diligence
Emerald Group procures goods and services from suppliers across the world. The scope of our supply chain includes the following activities: 

• Digital platform development and hosting.

• Production of printed materials and ancillary items.

•  The  procurement  of  goods  and  services  not  directly  related  to  the  production  of  print  and  digital  products  (including  office  supplies,  

travel and technology).

We select our suppliers with care. In order to identify and mitigate the risk of Modern Slavery in our supply chain we undertake checks / due 
diligence in connection with Modern Slavery on existing suppliers and prospective suppliers on a risk assessed basis.

In respect of existing clients, the outcome of this due diligence allows us to take appropriate steps to manage any risk of Modern Slavery 
including reconsidering the continued relationship with those suppliers.

In respect of prospective suppliers, the outcome of this due diligence informs our decision to include them in our supply chain and, if so, 
whether appropriate contractual protections are to be included in our agreements with those suppliers to manage any perceived risk of 
Modern Slavery. 

Signed 

Simon Cox
Director

